Introduction

The Death of Fantomas is actually comprised of the last two issues of the Fantomas pulp series, written by Pierre Souvestre and Marcel Allain, published by Artheme Fayard just before World War I. They are:

* No. 31. La Cravate de Chanvre (translated here as The Hemp Necktie), released on August 20, 1913; and

* No. 32. La Fin de Fantomas (translated as The Death of Fantomas in our companion volume), released on September 201913.

These two stories were written at a time when Souvestre and Allain were concentrating on another series, the patriotic adventures of superspy Nez-en-l’air (15 issues, released 1912-13). It is, therefore, more than likely that they used a ghostwriter (or ghostwriters) to lighten their burden on Fantomas. Certainly, La Cravate de Chanvre and its immediate predecessor, L’Hotel du Crime, appear to have been ghosted, which would explain certain inconsistencies both in plot and characterizations.

Soon after Fantomas ended its enormous successful run, Pierre Souvestre died, quite suddenly, of pulmonary congestion on February 26, 1914, and we will never know what his plans might have been for an eventual return of the LordofTerror.m

It wasn’t until 1925 that Allain alone dared to resurrect Fantomas, but most everyone agree that the subsequent volumes he wrote have little left of the surreal horror and diabolical plots of the original series.

Meanwhile, Fantomas’ fame grew by leaps and bounds, boosted by the brilliant Gaumont serials directed by Louis Feuillade which came out in 1913 and 1914.121

We have chosen here to present the last two issues of the original series because, for the most part, they form a complete story. However, because the format relied heavily on the “to be continued” principle, inherited from the old newspaper feuilletons, it is useful to give the reader a brief summary of the events that happened before the curtain rises.

The year 1912 opened with what might well be Fantomas’ greatest criminal enterprise: the robbery of the Paris Mint, known as the Hotel des Monnaies. In order to further his scheme, Fantomas murders the man-servant of the Director of the Mint, then his mistress, and frames him for both crimes. Impersonating a detective, Fantomas then seeks to gain the Director’s trust by pretending to help him prove his innocence. In reality, he is trying to gain access to the gold bullion and steal it. However, the scheme is foiled, as usual, by his nemesis, Detective Juve, who has identified Fantomas. Still, the master criminal manages to escape in the nick of time, trapping Juve and his boss, Surete Chief Havard. (This is the subject of episode 28, Le Voleur d'Or.)

Meanwhile, Helene, Fantomas' alleged daughter,111 has been kidnapped by her father’s gang and is being held prisoner aboard a semiautomated ship which eventually reaches the Bay of Campeche in Mexico. That ship—which can also travel underwater like a submarine!— was designed by Fantomas to carry his plunder, once a year, to his secret lair in Mexico. Rigorous instructions have been left with the locals, who serve Fantomas, to kill anyone aboard upon arrival. In this case, the only passengers are Helene and the ship’s captain, later revealed to be Vladimir, Fantomas’ equally evil son.

Helene, of course, manages to escape and eventually finds Fantomas’ secret lair, hidden in a lost valley surrounded by foreboding mountains and hostile Indians. The Lord of Terror’s treasure is safely stored under a torrent, whose bed hides an invisible safe.

Meanwhile, back in France, Fantomas is now impersonating Juve. Using this disguise, he frees M. Havard from his own trap, thus convincing the trusting Director that he is indeed Juve. Even better, Fantomas has the real Juve, committed to the Sainte-Anne lunatic asylum, and later succeeds in getting his hands on a reward of 10,000 francs promised by Havard for his own capture!

Fortunately, Juve manages to clear his name, but only to discover that, in the meantime, Fantomas has fled to Mexico. The indomitable detective follows. Fantomas arrives just in time to save Vladimir and Helene from the natives. Eventually, Juve saves Helene’s life by shooting Vladimir, just as he was about to murder his half-sister. Fantomas escapes, leaving his son’s body behind. (This is the subject of episode 29, La Serie Rouge.)

We’re now in April 1912. Journalist Jerome

Fandor, Helene’s fiance, is at the Dermas sanatorium in Switzerland, watching over his dying mother. Before he left for Mexico, Fantomas had ordered his men to kill Fandor, because he wants to stop him from marrying Helene. The Lord of Terror’s agents fail and, instead, become responsible for the death of Fandor’s mother. Seeking revenge, the journalist returns to the Sanatorium, disguised as attorney Paul Mazeran, to conduct his own investigation.

At that moment, Fantomas and Helene arrive separately in Switzerland. Fantomas has decided that he can just as well sabotage the lovers’ wedding plans by proving to Helene that Fandor has been unfaithful to her. He does that by tricking Fandor into kissing Natacha, a young Russian anarchist who has repented her sins and is dying, and has asked Fandor for one last kiss. The chivalrous young Frenchman could hardly refuse! Watching from afar, Helene is convinced of Fandor’s betrayal and leaves Switzerland for parts unknown.

Meanwhile, Fantomas, after committing another murder, steals a large sum of money from the Sanatorium, before vanishing into the night. (This is the subject of episode 30, L'Hotel du Crime.)

The curtain now rises, a few weeks later, in Saint-Petersburg in Tsarist Russia...

Jean-Marc Lofficier

BOOK ONE: THE HEMP NECKTIE

CHAPTER I - The Police Lieutenant


The oil lamp tumbled to the floor. The room, which had been bathed in the half-light cast by the lamp under its large lampshade, plunged suddenly into darkness.

It was a large room, heavily cloaked, in the Russian style, with thick tapestries. The air was hot, heavy, filled with the extraordinary scent of leather that permeates Russian homes, palaces and humble dwellings, along neighborhood

streets and the main arteries of St. Petersburg.

Obviously, something terrible was going on. But, with darkness veiling the horror, it would have been difficult to make out exactly what tragedy was being played out. Yet, the sound of fighting filled the air.

Panting. Every now and then a rough voice rang out. Hoarse insults: “Scoundrel! Wretch! Murderer!” all followed by appeals to the holy icons, desperate entreaties to the Madonna, the Virgin, the Little Father since, in Russia, the Tsar is appointed by God in person!

Silence fell again, suddenly, interrupted by the same sounds, scuffling, furniture falling, chairs bumping, and yet again the heavy sound of adversaries trying to overpower one another, falling to their knees, getting up, falling again.

A horrible battle was being waged in the dark. It went on and on. Five minutes had already passed since the lamp had fallen and gone out. Yet, there was no sign that the fight was drawing to an end.

The combatants, obviously, were fierce adversaries, filled with a mortal hatred. They had to be brave, strong, powerful, fighting with the conviction that their struggle would come to a tragic end.

Yet, this house was the calmest one in all St. Petersburg. Everyone would have sworn that no such drama, no such battle could ever take place

here. Boris Pokroff, a lieutenant in the secret police, the Tsar’s man, lived there.

Boris Pokroff, in his forties, dark face, broad shoulders, a well-built colossus, was a major personality. His position with the police, a very senior one, made him a man to be reckoned with. His instructions came from the Tsar personally. Boris Pokroff was feared by the poor. He hunted down the nihilists, just as he tracked down common criminals. It was well known that, on occasion, he made personal sacrifices and that he was not a man to retreat in the face of danger, no matter how great.

As a result of his duties, it is true, Boris Pokroff was often the target of vengeance. With a grim sense of humor, people referred to him as the “gallows man”. In fact, his activities kept the hangmen busy performing the executions that held Russia in the grip of fear and brought to mind the iron hand that governed the large, friendly country.

Naturally, each execution garnered new enemies for Boris Pokroff. The head of the secret police received threats constantly. In return, he was perpetually under guard, surrounded by a crowd of police officers, each one spying on the next, always on the look-out for a traitor, constantly fearing assassination, always on the defensive.

Obviously, the fight being fought in his house that night meant that the police lieutenant’s adversary was a determined man, a scoundrel who, without a shadow of a doubt, had already sacrificed his life and wanted only one thing—to kill the police officer before being strung up on some terrible gallows!

Regardless of who this man was, he had, obviously, met his match, as the saying goes.

Boris Pokroff must have been surprised at work. He was, in fact, signing arrest orders when the man had rushed him. Immediately, the scene had transformed into a merciless struggle, a terrible battle that waged on and on, without an end in sight, in the dark.

But, then, a cry of anguish filled the room. One of the two adversaries had just suffered a serious injury. A cry of joy rang out at the exact same time.

“Ah, now I’ve got you...!”

Another cry, the terrible shriek of a man having his throat cut... followed by the sound of a body falling heavily onto the carpet.

Silence returned, impressive. A moment later, nothing more than ragged breathing, all too quickly replaced by a death rattle, a weak sound, almost a moan, the gurgle of drowning.

“He’s done for!” a deep voice rings out in the heavy silence.

The man speaking, moreover, regardless of who he is, the police lieutenant or his attacker, has to have been an extraordinarily brave man. He had just taken part in an abominable battle. He had, of course, just taken considerable risk with his life.

Yet, the words were uttered in a firm, unwavering voice.

A few minutes passed. The victor spoke again, “Now, down to business.”

His heavy, weary footsteps shook the carpet. He must have been digging through his pockets since the familiar clicking of a set of keys could be heard, followed by the scraping of a match and a flicker of flame.

“Let there be light!” the voice said.

Guided by the light of his match, he picked up the lamp. The glass had broken, but the wick was still intact and the lamp could still be used.

The man lit it.

Only then, did he turn his head.

“Just as I was saying,” he murmured. “That imbecile is done for. I do believe that he is quite dead.”

The man faced the most frightful of scenes. In the disorderly room, a room with the tragic look of murder, a man lay on the carpet, folded arms unmoving. A long dagger jutted up from the frightful wound in the poor wretch's throat. The blow that carried it had been wielded in a last-ditch attempt at violence. The carotid had been severed. Possibly the spinal column had been cut.

Then the voice repeated, “Let’s get down to business. What time is it?”

The man took a gold watch from his pocket.

“Good grief! Five o’clock,” he murmured. “Marfa will be down in an hour. I’ll have to be quick about this.”

For a second, the man seemed to hesitate. The battle he’d just waged, the drama in which he’d taken part, had without a doubt, despite his composure, despite his unquestionable audacity, rattled him somewhat, since he seemed to have no clear idea as to what to do...

“That body is bothersome,” he murmured a short while later. “No one needs to know about this. A death like this would just complicate the situation. Why worry His Majesty?”

His words were strange, impossible to understand. Yet even harder to decipher, however, was the attitude of the man uttering them. He was rushing, in fact. To take on a strange task. He’d just headed toward a large earthenware stove, one of those enormous, monumental stoves found only in Russia, made necessary by the harsh climate.

“This burns with the fires of hell,” he commented. “I couldn’t hope for better.”

He’d opened the door of the stove, bent over the fire, and clucked his tongue, almost joyful.

“Really, this is a bit of luck, since I wouldn’t want anyone to find out...”

He didn’t complete his sentence but, with a calm that demonstrated his complete composure, he returned to the cadaver. The living man lifted the dead one. Quickly he dug through his victim’s pockets. Papers, a wallet, a letter... he picked up everything and placed it on the desk.

“It’s always a good idea to keep documents. It makes the job easier.”

And he continued to speak such truths to himself with the impressive sang-froid of someone trying to make the best of a delicate situation.

He showed no sign of embarrassment, concern. His search of the body completed, he looked at it for a moment, shrugged and uttered one word, the most terrible, the crudest of epitaphs, “Imbecile!”

Then he muttered, “He should have used the revolver.”

At that moment, standing in front of the stove, he appeared to think.

“This might not be the best means. Bah! I don’t have any choice. And this assassination must be covered up.”

Coldly, he pushed the body into the stove and closed the iron door. At that moment, despite himself, he shivered.

“Let’s hope the body will burn.”

He stood there, next to the door, listening.

Soon, a smile swept over his face. The fire, almost dead earlier, kicked back into life with a new intensity. A rumbling rose up through the grille. The dead man’s clothing must have ignited already. Then, something abominable occurred, a familiar sound, rendered tragic by the circumstances, the crackling, the sputtering of the flames as they licked at flesh.

Two minutes later, the man frowned again.

“Good grief! I didn’t even think about this little problem!”

The problem he referred to was obviously, a moral one. The man who had killed, possibly in self-defense, the man who was just now burning his victim’s body appeared to want to cover his recent actions with silence. Yet, circumstances were against him.

After deciding to cremate the body, to eliminate it, to make any search impossible, he realized that the fire would leave traces that, without a doubt, would draw attention. The room, in fact, was filling with acrid smoke, with the disgusting odor of burning fat and flesh.

“What a disaster!” he said. “I could be asphyxiated.”

He showed no signs of shame, no disgust. He seemed put out by the turn of events, but showed no sign of any other emotion.

“That odor, that smoke!” he grumbled. “This could cause problems. Better take care!”

He turned off the lamp and walked over to the window.

A moment later, the curtain drawstrings squealed. The pallid dawn of a pale day penetrated the large room. The man opened the two inside windows, since Russian houses always have double windows.

“What a disaster!” he grumbled again.

Then he added, “It’s terribly cold this morning and yet it’s snowing.”

It was snowing, in fact, with large flakes rushing down one after another, without end, without slowing, in dizzying swirls. And the cold was intense, 20 degrees below, not counting the wind, which was blowing fiercely.

With no regard for the cold, the man leaned over the sill. He looked out over the white panorama of houses buried under snow as far as the eye could see. Obviously, it was winter and St. Petersburg would look like this for another six months to come.

“No sleigh, no one about,” grumbled the man. “It’s still early. Good.”

And he breathed in the air with a bored gesture.

“What a stench! What smoke! This is surely enough to rouse the neighborhood. Bah! It will take no more than a moment,” he murmured.

At this point, as he leaned against the railing in front of the window, he jumped in surprise.

“Hey!” he said, “I’ve been injured. I didn’t even notice it!”

He had just seen, in fact, a large drop of blood fall onto the ledge of the window. His face darkened. He looked eminently upset.

“Blood, blood! I don’t need people to find blood in the office, particularly since that Marfa is such a gossip...”

In four steps, he strode across the room, coming to a stop in front of a mirror. He was rather seriously wounded and only the stress of the tragic moment could account for why he had not yet noticed that fact. His face had been gouged, a large cut running from his cheek to his throat.

“Honestly, it ended just in time!" he complained. “A bit longer and that would be me in the fireplace...”

He must have found his comments entertaining since he burst out laughing. Yet, even as he continued to chortle, the man didn’t waste a second. He quickly bandaged his wounds. He took a flask from his pocket and used its contents to wash his injury. The blood stopped flowing.

“Fine!” he murmured. “If I pull up my collar, no one will notice this little nick. It will heal quickly. In just 24 hours and no wagging tongues will bother me.”

The fireplace continued to smoke, however.

And the bitter odor persisted. Despite the wind rushing in through the windows, chasing billows of white snowflakes into the center of the room, the atmosphere remained oppressive.

“This is taking so long!” the man grumbled.

He walked back over to the fireplace and, noticing a large poker leaning against the wall, he prepared to stir up the fire. Yet, once the iron door was open he stepped back, despite himself. It was a horrible spectacle. As the fire burned, the cadaver contorted in a most horrible manner. The body was already three-quarters consumed, impossible to recognize, without a human face, its hair and beard burnt, the eye sockets empty, a gaping hole in the belly spewing foul materials that immediately disappeared up in smoke.

“Ah, I hope Til finally be rid of that imbecile in 15 minutes!”

Enraged, the man continued to stir up the fire. The limbs of the cadaver twisted even more. For a moment, it looked as if the hands were waving, large fingers splaying, then clenching in a vengeful grasp.

“Damn!” the man grumbled, “That does look impressive!”

He slammed the door.

Despite the barely closed stove, the man was shivering. The wind had carried an arctic cold into the once hot room.

“This could be the death of me,” the man thought. “And yet, no one must notice the odor, no one must notice the smoke.”

Possibly to warm himself, but more certainly in an effort to remove the traces of the struggle, the man set to repairing as much of the disorder that reigned in the room as he could. He picked up chairs that had been turned over, straightened small objects on the desk, taking extreme care with his task.

It was impossible, however, for him to completely remove all signs that a bloody battle had taken place. One chair had broken a pane of glass and the foot of a delicate side table when it fell.

"I can explain that!" thought the man.

But, when facing a large blood stain that marked where the body had fallen, he seemed somewhat more embarrassed.

“That’s a lot of blood!" he grumbled. “Bah! We’ll see!"

Although the smoke was waning, the odor persisted. Once again, the assassin poked at the fire, where no more than a few remnants of charred bones remained, slowly turning into ash, and then he walked over to the desk.

“There’s no time to waste! I must get back to work!"

Just a few brief seconds after the man had taken a seat behind the desk, the door to the office opened suddenly. The man jumped.

“Since when do you come into my office like this, Marfa?" he asked.

An old woman had just entered the room. She might have been 50 or so, but deprivation, poverty and hard work had worn her down so that she looked like 60. Obviously, Marfa was a servant. Her white hair disappeared under a cap and she wore a large blue apron, both signs of her position. Hearing the criticism implied in the man’s voice, she stopped short.

“Oh, your Excellency," she murmured. “I didn’t think, as the Little Father is my witness, that you were there! You rarely work at this time, your Excellency. It’s barely six in the morning.’

Hearing those words, the man shrugged.

“Marfa,” he ordered, harshly, “You should know that I work all hours of the day and night. There’s no rest for Boris Pokroff!”

The police lieutenant since, obviously, it was the lieutenant who had won the battle and was answering the old servant, spoke with a barely concealed anger.

Marfa, however, no matter how much she respected her master, must have been accustomed to dealing with his harshness since she showed no signs of dismay. Quite the contrary, she smiled and set about putting the little objects that lay strewn willy-nilly about the room back in their places.

The old maid grumbled, “In any case, perhaps you work all the time, but one thing is certain, your Excellency is not always reasonable. Opening the windows in weather like this! There’s no rhyme nor reason in that!”

As the old maid headed over to the windows, Boris Pokroff ordered, “Leave the windows open!”

Upon hearing the order, old Marfa rolled her eyes in surprise.

“But this can’t be!” she grumbled. “The snow is blowing in all over.”

“Too bad.”

“But it’s 20 below!”

“Too bad.”

This time, Marfa placed her hands on her hips and looked her master straight in the eye.

“You always say the same thing!" she complained, “There’s no hope for you! Twenty below and the windows open! No! And you’re not even wearing your pelisse!”

She took three steps toward the stove and added, “What’s more, the fire must be almost out!”

“Leave the fire alone,” Boris Pokroff interrupted.

“But it’s going to run out of wood, your Excellency!”

“Leave it alone, I said!”

Surprised, Marfa took three steps back.

“Fine,” she said, in the familiar tone of old servants who can dare to make such comments. “I’m not even going to try to understand anymore. You don’t want a fire? It will be the death of you!”

In an authoritative manner, ignoring the order she’d been given, Marfa turned back to the stove. Just as she was about to open the iron door, the man knew he had to stop her. Boris Pokroff stood up abruptly. He grabbed the old woman’s arm, forcing her to stand still,

“Are you going to obey me? I told you to leave the fire alone!”

This was, obviously strange, so strange even that Marfa looked at her master, unable to hide her concern.

“Good grief, you’re frightening me!” she said.

Then, taking a deep breath, she added, “You really are behaving oddly. And how this room reeks!”

Boris Pokroff didn’t answer, seeming to consider the servant looking at her intently.

Marfa started up again, “And the entire house is filled with smoke.. .Obviously, you’ve been up to something again...”

But she interrupted herself in mid-sentence, to scream in fright.

“Oh! Holy Virgin, Mother of God,” the maid said. “By all that’s holy, what is that?”

Boris Pokroff had released her arm and she walked to the middle of the carpet bent over and added, “But it’s blood! It’s blood!”

And, suddenly Marfa turned around.

“Your Excellency, you’re hiding something from me. Whatever happened here?”

Just then, Boris Pokroff took a thin yellow cigarette from a cup and leisurely lit it.

“I had a nose bleed, Marfa,” he said.

The old maid clasped her hands.

“Oh! What a miserable day. And you didn’t even tell me! Your Excellency, you must not move. You have to stay still!”

“That’s what I’m doing, Marfa.”

“But why didn’t you tell me? I would never have bothered you with my idle chatter! You must have bled a lot!”

“Yes, a lot, Marfa.”

The maid was pacing back and forth now.

“Too bad. I’m closing the windows,” she declared. “I know that you need air but, anyway, that’s no reason to get really, really sick!”

As she closed the window, the maid saw the broken pane of glass in a dark corner.

“And that?” she murmured. “My God! So many misfortunes today!”

Boris Pokroff shrugged.

“I had a nosebleed and then, as I was walking about in the dark, I struck that pain of glass and fell to the floor. That’s all Marfa.”

But there would just be one surprise after another that day for the old woman. Now, she was no longer listening to her master. Eyes wide, she started at a small table standing at the other end of the office.

“Your Excellency... Your Excellency,” Marfa called.

“What now?” said Boris Pokroff.

“What’s this, then?”

Already, Marfa’s voice was changing. The old servant had turned pale and her hand, as she pointed at a piece of furniture, was shaking.

Boris Pokroff turned to look. There it was, forgotten by mistake, the dagger that he had plunged in his victim’s throat a while earlier.

Without a moment’s hesitation, Pokroff replied, “That dagger, Marfa, is a piece of evidence

I need for a trial. Does that answer all your questions, now?”

Boris Pokroff pretended to lose his patience. The old servant noticed nothing. Still very pale and shaking violently, she nodded her head, enraged.

“Your Excellency, that’s hardly possible!” Marfa uttered. “That dagger is still covered with blood and the blood is fresh...”

Marfa looked Boris Pokroff straight in the eyes. He suddenly lost his calm.

“You have no right to doubt my word,” he ordered.

Then he lost his temper.

“Go get the mail for me. Hurry up! And come straight back!”

This time, Marfa, who was still quite upset, did not dare disobey her master’s order. She left the room. As soon as she had gone, Boris Pokroff ran over to an electrical panel located close to the desk. He bent over the call buttons, checked the labels, and pressed one for a long time.

A second later, two men, giants, identified by their uniforms as members of the police squad responsible for security in St. Petersburg, entered the room.

“At your service, your Excellency,” they said as one.

Boris Pokroff looked determined. He stared at the two strapping men who stood at attention, as motionless as statues. Without a doubt, the honest loyalty he saw in the two servants’ eyes reassured him.

“I can count on them!" he thought.

“Alexander Alexandrovitch!” he said.

“At your command, Your Honor.”

“Fedor Fedorovitch!”

“At your command, Your Honor.”

“You will pick up the person I tell you to and take him immediately to the chain gang. Is there a chain gang leaving for the mines this morning?”

“Yes, your Excellency.”

“Fine, here’s the arrest warrant.”

Boris Pokroff scribbled a few worlds on a large sheet of paper, which he gave to the two policemen.

“Don’t mention this to anyone.”

“Yes, Your Excellency!”

The two men showed no surprise.

The Siberian mines are terrible places. Generally, they’re reserved for people sentenced to death, people the government wants to get rid of. The people sent there never return. Many die along the way, from cold, fatigue, deprivation. The prisoners set out on foot, chained to one another. Others die in the mines, at the farthest reaches of the steppes, in an icy hell.

Moreover, it’s quite easy to sentence someone to this slow death. An accusation of nihilism, a political smear, the whiff of a suspicion.... that’s all the courts need to impose such terrible sentences. Perhaps even less. The Russian police, charged with maintaining security, for ensuring the safety of the Tsar, can freely, without answering to anyone, send anyone they want to the mines. Even today, the police enjoy the power once conferred by lettres de cachet before the Revolution. And the police lieutenant had, in fact, just signed such a letter. Who did it name?

A moment later, Marfa returned. The old servant carried the mail over to the desk.

“The mail, Your Excellency.”

“Hand it over!” said Boris Pokroff.

He took the mail and added, “You can leave now, Marfa.”

The servant headed for the door.

Boris Pokroff waved his hand.

“Take her!" he ordered.

It took no more than a second. The elderly servant had no time to cry out in surprise. The two henchmen leapt at her, gagged her and dragged her out.

“To the mines,” they yelled.

Boris Pokroff stood alone, smiling.

“That woman will never speak,” he grumbled.

Then, the police lieutenant brushed his hand over his forehead.

“It is true, he added, “That those two imbeciles who just arrested her might say something... Bah! I'll take care of that”

He rang again. A moment later, four police officers listened as Boris Pokroff issued orders.

“You will find Alexander Alexandrovitch and Fedor Fedorovitch, your colleagues.”

“Yes, Your Excellency.”

“You will arrest them.”

“Yes, Your Excellency.”

Boris Pokroff realized that the two officers were dumbfounded. Without a moment’s hesitation, he explained his conduct.

“I have information about them. They’re nihilists...”

Then he waved his hand at the four officers, who seemed frightened.

“Go! I’m counting on you.”

A moment later, Boris Pokroff was once again alone in his office. He seemed quite satisfied.

“Things are coming along just fine,” he muttered. “One body, three people off to the mines...Now no one will say a word and the Tsar will know nothing. The Little Father will not be concerned!”

The police lieutenant went back to work.



CHAPTER II - The White Card



“It's snowing out, Ma’am.”

“I don’t care!”

“It’s terribly cold out.”

“So, I’ll wear my pelisse.”

“No one would want to go out, Ma’am.”

“I’m going out anyway.”

“But that’s just careless.”

“I can be as careless as I want.”

“Well, may the Holy Saints keep you then. Will you be coming back early?”

“I have no idea.”

“Madam won’t leave the city at least, will she?”

“I don’t think so.”

“There are wolves this time of year, lurking about the city.”

“Bah! Wolves don’t scare me!”

“Really? You’re not afraid of anything?”

“Nothing, Gregoria. Nothing at all!”

The young woman who was demonstrating such peace of mind, such surprising courage, an audacity so placid, was tall, possibly about 20, and should have been pretty. She had a fine figure, a pleasing voice and her slightest movements were filled with a particular grace, an innate distinction, a truly deep charm. Her face was hidden behind a very thick veil. It would have been difficult, even impossible, to recognize her.

Yet, the sparkle of her large eyes, both energetic and soft, revealed the remarkable beauty of her very expressive features.

“Madam is not afraid of anything!” grumbled the elderly maid who, while working for the lodgers who occupied the furnished rooms in the house, was helping the stranger dress.

Gregoria, of course, would never have gone out in such weather. Since the morning, in fact, large flakes of snow had been falling, constantly doubling their violence, and the ground, blanketed in a thick carpet, was thoroughly frozen by the intense cold. Crossing herself, she watched the extraordinary preparations of the young woman who was audacious enough to want to face the rigors of the climate, at any cost.

Her preparations did not take long. Although the young woman did demonstrate a certain flirtatiousness while arranging the folds of her veil, which she bundled into her thick fur pelisse, it appeared that she had other concerns than elegance. She barely glanced at the mirror on the wall before slipping her hands into a thick muff and then left the room.

A second later, the foreigner, and she certainly had to be a foreigner since there was nothing Russian about the young woman, was in the street. Instinctively, she glanced right and left, as if afraid of being followed or possibly spied on. But that didn’t prove anything since, in Russia, the police were so powerful that everyone was always afraid of being spied on, denounced, for the most futile reasons, the most insignificant incidents.

In any case, the young woman should have been reassured since the street she found herself in was deserted as far as the eye could see, cast into deep silence by the soft carpet of snow.

She walked down the street, reached the Nevsky Prospect, then continued quickly on her way, heading to a sort of station where five or six horse-drawn sleighs stood in a line, ready for hire. She walked past the sleigh station, looking carefully at the drivers, one by one.

Was she hoping to recognize one of the placid coachmen who, in keeping with fashion in the country all wore, in addition to the traditional Russian dress, enormous cummerbunds that gave them the paunchy shape considered the epitome of elegance for drivers in St. Petersburg?

“I don’t know a single one of them. They all look so calm, I don’t dare try!”

Walking past the past carriage, leaving the Nevsky Prospect, the stranger headed into a new street, broad as all streets in St. Petersburg are, just as deserted as well since all the streets are deserted at this time of day and in this kind of weather.

Two sleighs drove by. This time, the young woman hailed one of them.

“Stop, little father.”

Immediately the driver reined in his horses and the sleigh stopped as he flattered his beasts with the most endearing of epithets.

“Gently, my little swallows! Stop my little lambs of God! Slower my winged arrows!”

The stranger walked over to the sleigh. Obviously, she was familiar with Russian ways since she had taken a few coins from her purse, which she held out to the man.

“Take this, little father. I like your cummerbund and I want you to drink your tea hot this evening.”

The coachman was not surprised by this familiar expression of courtesy.

In France, people give tips when they get out of a carriage. In Russia tips are given when you hail a sleigh since, in this way, the driver knows how much generosity to expect from his client and can decide how cooperative he wants to be.

The young woman, however, after paying her driver a tip, frowned, seemed to hesitate a moment and then sent the sleigh off.

“Go on, little father! I’ve changed my mind. I no longer need you.”

Although he was surprised by the client’s sudden dismissal, the driver didn’t hesitate long, happy to have pocketed a tip that had not been hard to earn.

Yet, if the driver was surprised at being stopped and then sent on his way, he would have been even more surprised if he had accompanied the young women for even a few moments. She did, in fact, stop a second sleigh. One after another, she stopped four in all, giving the drivers tips and then sending them on their way.

A fifth was more fortunate. Just as the young woman held out a few coins to him, he appeared to be overwhelmed with emotion.

“Ah! Pardon me,” he said, jumping up and down on his seat. “I didn’t understand...”

And stranger even than these mysterious words, were his actions as he reached out his hand to the young woman as if to give her a

familiar hug.

The stranger was not the least bit offended. Perhaps she had paled a little, but that was her only reaction. She was most certainly a strange woman, with strange tasks since, without indicating any intentions, she climbed into this last sleigh and sat down without even giving the driver an address.

It would in all likelihood have been pointless to make the effort since, as soon as she sat down, the driver was already urging his horses into motion., He had three robust animals hitched side by side, heads crowned with the quaint bells so typical of Russia.

“Away my swallows! Run my little birds of the steppes! Faster, faster, my slender gazelles! We’re working for Mother Russia. We have to hurry for the cause!”

This was all very odd and yet the stranger remained impassive. As the sleigh quickly accelerated, sliding at a dizzying speed over the snow, the three horses walking strangely, the one in the middle galloping as the other two continued to trot, the foreigner started to talk out loud. She must have been very worried, her mild filled with a serious concern since, despite herself, her voice sounded shrill.

“My God! I was so afraid!” she murmured.

“I thought I’d given the wrong sign with my fingers... None of the drivers understood my hand signals. Only this one understood what I wanted... But where is he taking me?”

The young woman, as could be seen from her words, was not aware of the point of her race. It seemed, moreover, that she had chosen her driver, not at random, and based on his more or less good appearance, but for reasons she didn't explain in detail.

She had to have settled for a driver that acted in a certain way. Perhaps she was a member of one of those associations that were spreading through Russia? At least that would have explained the characteristic hand sign she had given the sleigh drivers, which only the last one had understood.

In any case, the young woman now slumped in the back of the sleigh, warmly wrapped in the furs there.

The three horses raced like bats out of hell, driven on by the driver’s voice, through the neighborhoods of St. Petersburg, covering large distances, then into the countryside where the sleigh slid even faster since the snow was deeper and frozen hard.

“Where are we going? Where are we going?” the young woman repeated from time to time.

The countryside looked almost deserted. The dawn revealed an infinite succession of large fields that disappeared uniformly under the mantle of snow and stretched as far as the eye could see with desperate monotony.

“Little father!" the young woman soon asked, “Is it far?”

The driver looked over his shoulder.

“We’ve covered seven verste and we have three more to go.”

“Good. Faster! God be with you!”

“God be with me, in fact.”

The driver turned back to his horses and urged them on, “Gallop my little white hen! Walk my adored star! Trot my duck with the long wings!”

And the sleigh flew even faster.

Just a few minutes later, a sudden turn in the path, revealed a small pine stand, some way off, surrounded by a dozen tiny white houses, like those of the Russian peasants. In the middle of the hamlet, stood a sort of covered shed, which served as a church. The coachman pointed at it with his whip.

“That’s it,” he said.

The young woman shivered. When the sleigh stopped, she turned white and seemed to be overcome with emotion. Yet she stepped down from the sleigh immediately and walked over to the wooden door of the church.

It was close to eight o’clock in the evening and normally the building should have been empty and plunged in the deepest darkness. That was hardly the case. The stranger stepped through the door and into the nave alight with sparkling candles and filled with a silent crowd.

“There are a lot of them!" she murmured.

Her teeth chattered with fright. Her entire body trembled.

“Bah! I’m doing my duty!" she added.

The intriguing woman walked on. As she stepped over the threshold, a man dressed in black like a sexton approached her.

“Who are you?” he asked.

“She who comes...”

“What do you want?”

“He who will go...”

“How do you want it?”

“By all means...”

The man in black dipped his head and pointed at a register.

“Sign, my sister.”

“Yes, my father.”

The young woman picked up a pencil and wrote the name that was to be hers in large letters: Olga. Then she kneeled on the floor, close to the nave, against the pulpit where the pope would harangue the faithful a few moments later.

Were those people filling the church the faithful? What did the words exchanged with Olga, if that really was her name, mean? They appeared to have a secret meaning, to be some sort of password.

The young woman had only been kneeling a few minutes when a pope entered the pulpit. He made no gestures of piety. He was a strapping fellow, in his fifties no doubt, with large hands, a bushy face. He appeared to be somewhat drunk, a common condition for Russian priests. Once settled, the pope pounded his fist on the edge of the pulpit, imposing silence.

“Brothers and sisters,” he started.

As the congregation fell silent to hear him, he pounded his fist against his chest.

“I have been sent here to you to replace our deceased brother, Pope Credo, hanged three days ago, by the order of the Tsar. None of you know me. I name myself: from now on you will be the brothers and sisters of Pope Alleluia. Is that what you want?"

The crowd filling the church shouted, “Yes!"

Then the pope, who had taken the name Alleluia, obviously a nom de guerre, clapped his hands.

“Brothers and sisters," he said. “I was very moved when I learned that I would head your section. What does this mean? I will do my duty! The one who must perish will perish and no one is better placed than I am to help you, when we will have to carry our banner at the head of the troupes and march against the enemy!"

These were, in fact, odd words for a priest. This pope had a strange way of calling the devoted to the love of God. He started to speak of murder and massacre.

“We will destroy everything, when the time comes!" he proclaimed. “Our justice will start with universal destruction. We will make the void equal. Brothers and sisters...”

This strange pope was about to continue preaching in these terms when one of the flock suddenly stood up.

“Alert!” he cried out.

Panic filled the church. Those who were sitting or kneeling stood up. Weapons sparkled. A thousand frightened voices ran out.

“What is it? Cossacks?”

But just then, a man climbed up the long stairs to the pulpit. The pope backed off to give him room. The man indicated that he wanted to speak.

“Brothers and sisters. I am convinced that there is a spy among us. You all know the risks we are taking. You all know that the Tsar will soon have all the gallows he needs to hang us, the nihilists. Well, I ask you to make an effort this evening. Let us defend ourselves! Death to traitors! Let us judge the one who has come to spy on us!”

Silence fell, impressive. In that church, which was usually deserted, a crowd of men and woman had gathered under Pope Alleluia. They were no faithful believers but conspirators, ferocious, terrible conspirators, known in Russia as nihilists. Formidable terrorists, frightful politicians founding a political movement on a very harsh moral framework, akin to the stoics, Utopians who are the cousins of the anarchists, the Russian nihilists cause a reign of terror in the largest empires. They are the personal enemies of the Tsar, the nobility, the rich. Prohibited by law, outlawed by decree, they simply deny the law. Force is used against them, they respond with cunning. They are dissolved, they reform. The authorities track secret associations, they prosper.

Russian nihilism is worse than the Italian mafia. Russian nihilists are exalted, sympathetic, convinced, rising from the flames like a phoenix, with their own martyrs. Each execution draws in more believers and one day the nihilists may well take on the Tsar, equal to equal.

The small chapel was filled with nihilists, who had taken over the building for their clandestine meetings. Pope Alleluia, like many popes, was a nihilist as well. Sent by the section president, he was responsible for maintaining order above all. As the clamor of voices swelled in response to the speaker’s words, Pope Alleluia spread his arms.

“Brothers and sisters, silence!” he roared.

And, in a fierce voice, he added, “There may not be enough gallows to hang us all, but the Tsar will order us strung up on the first branches available!”

He laughed, somewhat sardonically, then questioned the man standing with him in the pulpit.

“Brother, you say that there is a spy among us. How did you recognize him?”

The man shrugged.

“Someone came in,” he stammered. “Someone who certainly doesn’t know the rites of our association. Someone who, I have just made sure, signed the book but did not place his token in the urn. There is one signature too many in the book. There is one token too few in the secret urn. The individual without a token is definitely a spy.”

This was, in fact, a safety measure adopted by the nihilists. Always at the mercy of spies, always on the look-out for a denunciation, perpetually afraid of police brutality, hunted like wild animals, the nihilists invented a thousand ways to keep an eye on one another. At each meeting, for example, they voted on a new password. Only those who had attended the meeting could know it. As a result, only they could attend the next meeting, vouch for their nihilist credentials.

That evening, there had been two safety checks: signing the book was the first, placing a token in the urn was the second.

“Someone signed without a token,” screamed the man standing next to Pope Alleluia. “That person is a spy! Let him be brave and step forward!”

At that moment, a voice called out, a voice filled with disdain, “Here I am!”

It was a woman. She stood up and walked steadily toward the pulpit. A fierce silence reigned over the church.

Nihilists are not people to forgive spies. Their justice is expeditious, their sentences are often capital. The woman walking down the nave was inevitably walking to her death. Everyone fell silent to watch her.

Yet, from the top of his pulpit, the pope asked, “Who are you?”

The woman did not answer.

“Where do you come from?”

She remained silent.

“Are you with the police?”

The unknown woman had reached the pulpit. She climbed the steps without trembling. When she was halfway up, in clear view of the crowd filling the church, she motioned with her hand, indicating that she was about to speak.

“I’m not from the police,’ she murmured. “My name is Olga and you will recognize me by this.”

As she spoke she waved about am extraordinary golden case, which flickered with a thousand fires. Voices clamored again in the church. It was as if seeing the golden case had galvanized all of the nihilists there. But they were not crying out in anger. There were no furious imprecations, no enraged curses. Quite the opposite. They sounded sympathetic.

“Who are you? How did you get that? Speak, sister.”

Olga, since she was Olga, motioned for silence again.

“Natacha chose me,” she announced. “She gave me the golden case you see in my hands. Of course, you realize the terrible meaning of that.”

“Yes! Yes!” they responded.

Olga continued, “This case contains a terrible poison distilled a long time ago to execute the tyrant, the Tsar, who is oppressing the Russian people. Brothers and sisters, I have been denounced as a spy. If I were a spy, Natacha would never have entrusted this golden case to me. You wanted to know who I am? You will. I am the one who will kill the Emperor!”

Olga had barely uttered those words when emotion overwhelmed the congregation. The secret assassination, the murder of the Tsar, this political crime was ardently desired by all nihilists, convinced, like the fanatics they were, that once the Tsar was killed, Russia would be saved from the despotism of the noble classes.

All nihilists knew the secret of the golden case. The only one who could possess the magic case was the person who had agreed to assassinate the emperor. Natacha had held it in her hands at one time and when she passed it on to another woman, it meant that woman had decided to assume the tragic responsibility.

“Olga, Olga, you are our sister!”

Cheers erupted in the nave. Pope Alleluia had to intervene.

“Gently, my brothers,” he grumbled. “If the police are watching, they will hear you.”

But it was almost impossible to quell the crowd’s enthusiasm.

Olga made a supreme gesture. The nihilist, since the young woman had to be a nihilist, suddenly declared, “If you still have a doubt, let that doubt disappear. I have the means to place myself at your mercy. You are all here. Veiled, your faces are impossible to recognize. You will all see me with my face uncovered?

Olga tore off her veil. The cheers grew louder, in a crazy acclamation for the young woman, an unbelievable ovation. And that ovation continued to grow until, a few minutes later, Olga spoke again.

“For example, if I intend to accomplish my mission, I want you to help me in any way you can. You have to swear that, as long as the golden case is in my hands, none of you will make an attempt on the Tsar’s life. I want to choose the right time and he must not have any suspicions.”

Olga, her face uncovered, remained motionless on the steps. Who was this young woman who had just claimed a colossal place in the midst of the nihilists, who was this woman who had been hesitant on her way to the meeting yet now looked prepared to command all of the fanatics around her?

This young woman, this so-called nihilist, was acknowledged by the world of heroes. If Police Officer Juve had seen her, if the journalist Jerome Fandor had heard her, they would have been surprised, and they would have perceived that surprise as joy.

Juve would have yelled, “Helene!”

And Fandor would have shouted, “My wife!”

Was this Helene? Was this the daughter or rather the alleged daughter of Fantomas who, playing the role of Olga now found herself in St. Petersburg passing herself off to the nihilists as a nihilist herself?

That was the truth. Helene was Olga. It was Jerome Fandor’s wife who was just now receiving compliments from Pope Alleluia, who had been transported in enthusiasm. But what was Helene doing in St. Petersburg? More important, what was she doing with the nihilists? What was she planning to do with the golden case that sparkled in her hands?

Helene would have responded with a single word. With the pride that comes with taking a courageous action, she would have simply stated, “I’m doing my duty!”

Yes, the young woman was doing her duty. When she had arrived in the Alps a few weeks earlier, to join Jerome Fandor, Helene was astonished to come face to face with Fantomas.

At the very moment when these formidable events were taking place, Helene was still unsettled by an unexpected discovery she had made. In the mountain snow, the young woman had found a golden case. It contained compromising papers. As she read them, Helene understood their significance, became aware of terrible secrets. Suddenly she found herself tracking down a formidable plot against the Tsar. She learned that the sovereign of all the

Russias was in terrible danger, that he could be assassinated at any time.

Helene was suffering at the time. She had every reason in the world to believe that she had been betrayed, to imagine that Jerome Fandor had abandoned here, that he was in love with another woman. Yet despite her atrocious suffering, Helene did not hesitate. She understood that, before she dealt with her personal problems, she had a duty to play a role in the terrible secret she had unwittingly uncovered.

Regardless of the sympathy she felt for the nihilist cause—she knew that many of the Utopians’ demands were legitimate—Helene, like all honest people, disapproved of anarchistic assassination.

The Tsar was in danger. What should she do? Without hesitating and despite the fact she was alone, Helene decided to try to save him! And truthfully, it was to save the Tsar, to prevent a political assassination, as horrific as any crime, that Helene had come to Russia.

Like all valiant people, moreover, she obviously hoped that by dedicating herself to others she would forget her own suffering.

But would luck continue to be on her side? Would she ever manage to outsmart the nihilists? Of course! Helene must be quaking and experiencing some intense emotions in the small chapel, buried under the snow, as she heard a powerful flow, an ocean of cries and exclamations well up toward her.

Suddenly, the clock rang out over the din. It hadn’t yet finished ringing midnight when Pope Alleluia, quaked in turn.

“My brothers and sisters!” he shrieked

He pointed at the face of the clock, speaking quickly. “Today’s meeting has been thrown into turmoil by the unexpected arrival of our dear sister Olga. My brothers, we have not had the opportunity to speak of urgent matters and we can only stay in this church for another half hour without getting caught. Does anyone have any messages for us?”

Pope Alleluia thought that surely no one would answer his appeal. Yet three people stood up.

“Yes, yes. Let us speak!”

Pope Alleluia waved his hand and an old, shaky voice started, “I’d like to report thefts that have been occurring for some time now. The police are blaming us, the nihilists. This is very harmful for us. We’re revolutionaries, not thieves!”

The protestor had barely finished speaking when another voice spoke out, “I wanted to make the same complaint, to draw your attention to the fact that, according to the police reports prepared following each robbery, white business cards are left at the scenes of the crimes.”

More voices rang out. From the back of the church, people yelled, “White cards like these ones...”

The faithful had, in fact mysteriously found real business cards, but completely blank, on several of the chairs. What do these mysterious papers mean?

“My brothers and sisters,” Pope Alleluia yelled, “Let us go on our way. It's time. We will discuss this matter at our next meeting but, for the love of

Russia, let us leave now!”

Anyone who had looked at the lovely face of the so-called Olga would have noticed her deathly paleness.

But, what was happening now? The church slowly emptied. The sleighs that had been waiting outside were carried off by galloping horses.



CHAPTER III - The Tsar of All the Russias



Once the four agents he’d summoned had set out on the trail of the first two police officers he’d assigned to take the old maid, Marfa, to the chain gang heading off to Siberia, Boris Pokroff took a deep breath. It seemed as if this extraordinary individual had been relieved of a great burden, that he was regaining confidence and that, after the terrible night he’d just spent, he was now prepared to enjoy, and understandably so, a return to calm. He dropped heavily into one of the enormous arm chairs that decorated his office.

“Umpph!” he murmured. “Here I am alone and master of the situation.”

He walked about, while speaking, casting slow looks all around, considering the appearance of the room so attentively that one would have willingly imagined that he was seeing it for the first time and was trying to note all of the details.

“Fine. This will just make one memory more.”

He smiled briefly, as if enjoying some secret thought that he would not express out loud, then stretched like a man who has slept badly.

Boris Pokroff paced up and down a while more. He stopped before the wood stove that had just served as a funeral pyre and, opening the iron door, made sure that the flames had completely destroyed to cadaver he had stashed there.

The door closed once again, Boris Pokroff stopped by the bloody stain on the floor.

“That is a bit more of a problem! Obviously, this stain could draw attention. Bah, a nose bleed can explain everything!”

He took in the window with the broken pane, the table with the wobbly foot.

“That' s nothing at all. No one will ever know!”

And this time he chuckled outright. Boris Pokroff was undoubtedly a very intelligent man, a refined man in a Russia that was still home to so many semi-barbarians.

He continued his monologue, “This is a truly curious country. The chief of police required to handle such manners on his own. His officers all busy spying on one another. Intrigues everywhere. Endless problems caused by the nihilists. And then there’s His Majesty the Tsar, that timid young man who lives in fear of assassination while so many of his subjects have sworn to assassinate him!”

Suddenly, he interrupted his monologue, the monologue of the cynic he so obviously was, saying, “Back to work.”

He went to sit down behind his large desk. Already, he prepared to search through the papers in an open drawer, seeking some important document when he stopped short, upset. A large drop of blood had just fallen in the desk blotter.

Boris Pokroff picked up his handkerchief and wiped it over his face. It was covered with blood.

He stood up and walked over to a large mirror hanging on the wall, looked at it and frowned. The wound he’d received during the battle, the gash on his face, had re-opened. It was bleeding profusely. Obviously, if he wanted to stop this bothersome hemorrhage, he’d have to consult a doctor.

“Things are just getting worse and worse!” he grumbled.

He seemed to hesitate for a few moments then, making a decision, headed over to the ringer panel yet again. Once there, he hesitated again.

“This is abominable! I just had my maid arrested. I’ve had the people who arrested her arrested. All this, just to keep the situation secret, to make sure the Tsar has no suspicions. Yet, once again, I’m going to have to expose myself to the wagging tongue of that drunkard, my doctor!”

He stopped short and shrugged, “Bah! I’ll take care of him.”

He walked away from the bell panel, leafed through an address book, a sort of official directory, and walked over to the telephone.,

An hour later, Boris Pokroff stood in his room with a serious-looking young man. The doctor he had called. He was a young, recently returned to Russia, after earning a medical degree in Paris.

The young physician looked most surprised and, while washing Pokroff’s wound, remained profoundly silent. And he was entitled to be surprised. He had been called out under strange circumstances. A telephone call, telling him merely that a car would pick him up at his door, that he had to get into it, that he would be taken to see a patient who needed his care. He had received no other explanation.

In Russia, however, there are so many highly placed individuals who for, whatever reason and under many circumstances have an urgent need to remain anonymous that he had not hesitated to follow the instructions he was given. A few minutes later, a sleigh stopped at his door. He got in. It took him to the home of the chief of police.

“Well!" he thought, “What has happened here?”

He was very concerned and grew even more worried when, after he rang the doorbell, it was answer by Boris Pokroff in person.

“Strange!” he thought.

His amazement grew minute by the minute. Was he here to treat Boris Pokroff? And was Boris Pokroff hesitating to explain both the nature of his injury and the manner in which he had received it?

The physician had protested at first. He believed in his art and wanted to treat the man who had called in with a good conscience.

“I need to know what went on," he said. “I need to know if the wound is septic or aseptic.”

But Boris Pokroff just shrugged, “You won’t learn anything, doctor. Bandage my wound, that’s all I want.”

And the bandaging was just about complete. The doctor had just wound a long strip of cloth around the injured man’s face. He attached it with a pin and stepped back.

Boris Pokroff asked, “Could you tell me, doctor, how long it will take this wound to close?”

“Yes,” he replied, “It should take at least 48 hours.”

“Thank you.”

Boris Pokroff delicately slipped a bank note into the doctor’s hand and stood up, indicating that the man was free to leave.

“At your service, sir,” he said.

“Thank you, sir.”

The two men nodded.

“You know the way out? I’m sorry but I can’t accompany you.”

“Don’t worry, sir.”

The doctor started to walk down the stairs. He had barely reached the middle landing when he heard a whistle. It came from the upper floor. What did the signal mean? The doctor barely had time to think. The whistle blew again as two men rushed him, gagging him tightly, tying him up like a package.

From the top of the staircase, Boris Pokroff shouted, “Off with him! That’s the poor fool I told you about on the telephone. Take him back to the asylum and tell the manager, on my behalf, to keep a close eye on him!”

Boris Pokroff sniggered as he walked back into his office.

“Another one! Ensuring silence takes so much work!”

Then he turned thoughtful. “That doctor told me I should be free of this wound within two days. That’s two days I need to find.”

The head of the secret police picked up the telephone once again. He must have been contacting a highly placed individual since he immediately announced, “I have the honor of informing your Excellency that I will be away for 48 hours. I’ve dismissed my servants, given the necessary orders. Yet, as a result of the vengeance to which I’m exposed, I would appreciate it if Your Excellency would have his regular officers keep a discrete eye on my home. I want no one, absolutely no one to get into my house during my absence!”

Two days later, Boris Pokroff, faithful to the instructions he’d been given by the doctor, removed the bandage from his face. He chortled in satisfaction.

“Perfect. I’ve definitely been fortunate by deciding to be patient for once! It is impossible now to make out the injury I sustained. It has healed completely.”

In fact, no trace of the knife wound he’d received that tragic night could be seen. The unfortunate doctor, sent to live with the insane, must have been a skilled man. He’d been able to stitch the flesh perfectly, preventing any scarring.

Boris Pokroff rubbed his hands in unabashed joy, “And now for a little expedition!”

It looked, in fact, as if he were commanding some sort of adventure. His face had transformed instantly. This extraordinary man looked truly impressive. A sudden light flashed from his deep, black eyes. Boris Pokroff remained like that. Staring, for a few moments then, suddenly shrugging, he smiled.

In the large office where the injured man had spent most of his time during the two days of his voluntary captivity, papers were piled high. He grasped one and read it with extreme zeal.

“Hearing today. Well, I won’t miss that.”

As he said that, a strange, surprised smile flitted across his face. This man always seemed to speak with enigmatic words, in double entendres. It was no doubt one of the sad privileges of his trade as a private police officer, a Russian police officer, who, as he lied and lied, grew incapable of the slightest sincerity.

Boris Pokroff dressed with extreme care that morning. He pulled on satin shorts, silk socks, a blue suit and then slipped an unlikely hat, his court hat under his arm.

The Tsar’s secret police chief enjoyed a strange position. Although people generally supposed that no one knew his exact functions, that was not exactly true. The police officer was very well known. Although his face wasn’t popular in the universal meaning of the word, there was not a single person at court who had not seen him walk by, who did not have a relatively good idea of just what he did, who couldn’t guess that he was a man to be treated with kid gloves, a man you needed to be on good terms with.

Once he had donned his court attire Boris Pokroff checked the time on his gold, diamond encrusted watch, a princely gift from the Tsar, then used the telephone to call for a sleigh.

The chief of the secret police rarely used his own carriage. Obviously, he felt that it would be completely useless, given the public’s general hatred for him, to attract attention by using vehicles that would be noticed. In a sleigh, however, he did not attract attention.

The chief of the secret police left his home with a light step. He crossed the sidewalk, after glancing furtively left and right, a man always on the lookout for adventure, then jumped in behind the driver of the old, hired sleigh.

“Where can I take you, Your Excellency?”

“To Tsarskoye Selo.”

“Yes, Your Excellency.”

The driver clacked his whip and the horses trotted off.

Tsarskoye Selo is both a village and a fortress, a palace and, above all a prison. There’s no other word to describe the imperial residence of the Tsar of all the Russias, a sovereign reigning over the largest territory in the world.

The most respected and powerful of all sovereigns, the Tsar is condemned, despite everything to live in perpetual fear.

Russia, an immense state, could be compared to a giant vat in which the most varied ferments boil and foam. There are veritable castes in Russia and these castes are enemies. The nobility is hated by the people. The city worker is hated by the farm worker. The Siberians fight the Uralians and the Manchurians can’t get along with the Polish.

There is better or worse.

While the various peoples categorized as Russias have risen up against one another out of racial hatred, while differences in wealth have created rival castes, it should never be forgotten that there are formidable political parties in Russia and that, in addition to these dedicated political parties, there are secret societies that draw formidable armies to their banners.

And nihilism floats over all these elements of discord.

The nihilists who are, in theory, the followers of a sublime philosophy, succumb in reality to practices that could only be considered criminal. They are invisible, indestructible. They are as dangerous as martyrs, people of faith, the illuminated.

The nihilists promote terror and Tsarskoye Selo was born out of all this. This palace with its thick walls, with its fortified enclosure, is surrounded by massive police forces; this palace which no one ever approaches was actually designed to protect the Tsar against the perpetual threat of assassination.

It is a palace with sumptuous apartments, splendid gardens and festive events. It’s a city as a result of its scope and the resources at its disposal to protect itself against an uprising. It is a prison because the Tsar and his wife, the Tsarina, live there like prisoners.

The Tsar could easily be compared to the sultan. He can never go out with an imposing escort. He can never go into the street without being surrounded by armed protectors, without the police first sweeping the roads clear and ordering all windows closed.

At Tsarskoye Selo the most extraordinary distractions are needed to make up for such a sad existence. This prison has its own theatre, race track, game rooms. All of the luxuries that can possibly be imagined, all the specialties of modern life, can be found there, on a small scale, installed for the pleasure of the Tsar.

It was to this imperial residence, strange in so many ways, that Boris Pokroff was heading. Of course, as he gave the driver the address, he would have seen immense astonishment wash over the man’s face. The brave driver was not in the habit of taking people to such a place.

If he had not had the typical Russian sense of obedience, if he had not had a resigned, Slavic soul, he would have protested that it was impossible to drive to such a place. To approach the imperial palace... What madness! What audacity! The police would be standing 200 yards in front of it, ordering everyone to turn around, and he would neither argue nor resist.

The driver must then have been doubly surprised when, as they approached Tsarskoye Selo, Boris Pokroff stood up in the sleigh. He must have been recognized by the police officers who stared at the vehicle since they were allowed through to the monumental door without problem. Boris Pokroff motioned at the officer guarding the door that he was to pay the driver.

Forty minutes later, the chief of police was taken into an enormous room. He stood motionless, with an excessively respectful posture, bowed, bent in two while to tell the truth there was absolutely no one in the immense hall.

Boris Pokroff, it is true, knew that, from one moment to another, the Tsar who had summoned him for his daily audience could make his appearance. Quite naturally, Boris Pokroff, respectful of the customs and rules of protocol, remained bowed so as to be able to greet the Tsar as soon as he arrived.

And he did not have to wait long. After fifteen minutes, the door opened wide.

A chamberlain, in a blue uniform covered with gold announced, “His Majesty!”

And, as the chamberlain backed away, fading into the background, a short, thin blond man with narrow shoulders, a sickly look, a beard that was too long, eyes perpetually moving, filled with worry, entered the room.

It was Nicholas II, the Tsar, the emperor of all the Russians, the formidable autocrat whose sovereign authority seemed to have survived, well beyond ancient customs, into our century of liberty and modernity!

Nicholas II took a few steps and turned around suddenly to make sure the door through which he had entered the room had been closed and that chamberlain who had heralded his arrival had withdrawn. Then, reassured, the Tsar walked quickly over to the police officer, who was still bent in two, motionless, as if frozen in respect, not daring to utter a single word. He walked to the middle of the room and spoke, “Come here my chief of police.”

Docilely, Boris Pokroff walked over to the emperor. But Nicholas II shivered as he saw him stop again.

“Don’t stay there Pokroff,” he ordered. “You’re right under the light. I know that those cursed nihilists have sworn to take off my head!”

Boris Pokroff, still silent, took a step to the side.

“More to the right! More to the right!” the Tsar begged “You’re standing in front of a window. They can shoot you through the window!”

Boris Pokroff took another step.

“There, there!” said the Tsar. “I think we’re risking nothing!”

The emperor of all the Russias had pulled out an armchair. He looked as if he was about to sit, but then abruptly stepped away from the piece of furniture.

“I’m being careless,” he murmured.

And in a taut voice he gave another order, “You sit down, Boris Pokroff!”

The chief of police smiled and sat down. He remained there only a second and then got up abruptly, and the Tsar replaced him in the chair.

Boris Pokroff was not in the least surprised by all this activity. He knew exactly what it meant. Hadn’t they once found a box, in a chair intended for the Tsar, which would have exploded if he had sat down? Since that time, the Tsar distrusted all chairs. He never sat down unless one of his underlings had already tested the seat.

Nicolas II ran his hand across his forehead, as he seemed to enjoy a moment’s peace. Finally, he deigned to notice his chief of police. The Tsar stood up and in a bitter tone said, “What are you here to tell me Boris Pokroff? Who is going to kill me today?”

“Sire,” Boris replied in a serious tone. “I’m pleased to tell your Majesty that, at present, you’re in no danger at all.”

“Really,” the Tsar replied, in a skeptical tone.

“Sire,” stated Boris Pokroff. “Thanks to your Majesty’s magnificence I have been able to hang 78 of the most dangerous nihilists. Forty-two others are under lock and key at this very moment and will be executed shortly. I believe your Majesty is completely safe.”

The autocrat deigned to smile. “That’s what you always say. Meanwhile, where is the golden case?”

Boris Pokroff remained silent.

The Tsar lost his temper, “See! I’m not safe,” he murmured. “As long as the golden case remains in circulation, I have everything to fear.”

As he spoke, the Tsar wiped his handkerchief nervously over his face. The unfortunate dictator, this condemned man living such a pitiful existence, was dripping with fear. He knew about the existence of the golden case. He knew that the symbolic box contained a formidable poison, that the nihilists entrusted it to their most determined leaders, that any individual who was given the golden case for keeping promised, on their honor, to use it to kill the Tsar. Only his death relieved them from their mission. As long as the golden case was in circulation, the Tsar had no illusions at all. He knew beyond a shadow of a doubt that there was someone in the world who had sworn to kill him and that the killer would spend his life carrying out his mission.

After a moment’s silence, the Tsar asked Boris Pokroff, “And you? No one has tried anything against you?"

“No,” the police chief replied.

The Tsar lost his temper again, “You’re lying to me! I know you’re lying to me!”

That was one of his hobby horses. He trusted Boris Pokroff. He believed that the man was capable of protecting him, but he also knew that the chief of police was under constant threat from the enemy. The Tsar believed that Boris Pokroff took risks similar to his own. He feared that his police chief would be assassinated, not out of any pity for the man but because he needed him.

“You’re lying to me!” he murmured, his voice growing softer. “I’m convinced that you’re not telling me the entire truth. That’s bad, very bad.”

He panted, face red and congested.

Boris Pokroff replied with his usual calm, “I dare to tell your Majesty that he is making an error. Such audacity frightens me. Yet, your Majesty has no grounds to believe that I’m hiding the truth. Even if he were to have suspicions, he could imagine that I simply want to avoid useless alarms and, since I have sacrificed my life for him for many years now, I am prepared to die without saying a single word that could cause him pain!”

Just then, a fearful look crossed over the sovereign’s face. He believed that he understood, at least partially, Pokroff’s words.

“Ah!” he said in a heavy voice. I can see the truth, Boris Pokroff. You have been away for two days, so that’s a lie... I’m certain...”

“Is your Majesty spying on me, Sire?" Pokroff asked.

With those words, the emperor stood up abruptly.

“No, no. I don’t have anyone watching you," he swore. “I trust you completely. Don’t worry about that, Boris Pokroff. I trust you and only you!”

“That’s a great honor, Sire, and I’m profoundly grateful to your Majesty."

The Tsar started to pace up and down. He avoided walking in front of windows, he kept away from the furniture, he made sure he never stood under a light where he ran the risk, hypothetical as it was, of being crushed by enormous crystals.

Suddenly he turned around, “So, nothing new Pokroff?”

“No, sire.”

“On your honor?”

“On my honor, sire.”

“Well, go on then. I trust you and only you!”

Boris Pokroff bowed to the Tsar without replying. But as he bent over, the chief of the secret police frowned instinctively. He was thinking about his master and judging the Tsar.

“A poor man, an imbecile, a weakling. I was right to hide everything from him. He would have lost his head and that would have complicated things enormously.”

Boris Pokroff backed out of the room since no one was allowed to turn his back on the Tsar. Once he was gone, however, the dictator took a golden whistle from his pocket and blew. He never used the electronic calling buttons since he was afraid that they had been tampered with and would explode if he used them.

In response to the Tsar’s call, two men, two gigantic men, arrived. They were devoted servants, two brutes brought to the city from Caucasus to do God only what work. They came and went. Sometimes it seemed as if the Tsar was truly afraid of them.

As soon as they stood before him, he ordered, “Boris Pokroff has just left. Follow him. Spy on him. I want to know where he goes. Quick!”

As the two agents raced off, the Tsar looked even more concerned.

“My God!” he muttered. “If I could only be certain those two imbeciles won’t betray me! I use them to spy on my police but who can I get to spy on them?”

Lost in thought, Nicholas II started pacing up and down again, starting at the slightest sound.

Once outside the private salon where he had been received by the Tsar, Boris Pokroff walked off down the imperial hallways unaware that two agents were following him. He was worried. That had to be the reason he cried out, startled, when a fabulously beautiful woman raced ahead to meet him as he turned a corner.

It was the grand-duchess, Ekaterina, a close relative of the emperor and the Tsarina's matron of honor.

Despite her pale face, the grand-duchess smiled at him charmingly.

“Ah! Boris, Boris!” she sighed. “These last two days have been so long without you. You don’t love me anymore? You don’t want to love me?”

Boris Pokroff stepped back suddenly. Automatically he reached into his pocket as if looking for a weapon. At the same time, his face tensed. 

Yet the grand-duchess continued, “Listen, since that day I acknowledged the passion I feel for you, it seems as if you’re distancing yourself from me. I'm suffering, I’m suffering you know. Do you love someone else?”

The grand-duchess gave a pain-filled laugh. She shrugged and added, “I’m dying from jealously.”

Boris Pokroff smiled strangely in return. He approached the young woman, clasped her pale hands and kissed with passionate ardor.

“You’re suffering and you are wrong,” the police chief murmured. “You are jealous and you’re getting yourself worked up for no good reason. I love you, only you. I’ve already told you that!”

“No!” the grand-duchess protested. “You’ve never told me that!”

Boris Pokroff shivered.

“That’s true. I’ve never said it but you should have guessed.”

He seemed to hesitate, searching for the right word.

The grand-duchess, unaware of his disarray, continued, “I undoubtedly should have guessed, but it’s so nice to hear the words. Why won’t you say them? I tell you that I love you. Why do you refuse?”

The Russian noblewoman quivered. She was deliciously beautiful, captivating. Love made her a woman capable of distracting even the most resolute man from his duties.

Boris Pokroff, however, stiffened. He seemed to make an effort of supreme will replying in a hesitating, trembling voice, “I’m afraid for you... Being the mistress of a man such as I exposes you to disaster. I protect the Tsar. I’m the one they’ll kill first. I’m afraid of dragging you along my path. I don’t want to expose the woman I love to the vengeance I deal with effortlessly when I face them alone. That’s why I refuse to love you!”

Boris Pokroff did not need to add another word. The Grand-duchess Ekaterina placed her beautiful blond head on his shoulder and sobbed.

Boris Pokroff would have been surprising to look at right then. He raised his head suddenly, an ironic, sarcastic, demonic smile playing over his lips.



CHAPTER IV - An Utter Imbecile



He went by his own name, Nirdinsko, and seemed excessively proud about being the last in a line that had sold preserves. Yet, his pride was not justified because, while the Nirdinsko family had been merchants, that had never brought them happiness and, during a riot one day, their shop had been pillaged, burgled, and sacked by local people, calling them monopolists, usurers and, to be perfectly honest, shameless Jews.

In any case, Nirdinsko was a fat man, happy with his lot in life. He had not gone into business, but had married a widow to his liking, although she was thirty years his elder, for her considerable dowry, which consisted entirely of a servant placement agency.

Nirdinsko, whose girth continued to grow, was, therefore, in all senses of the word, a prosperous man. He had not even realized that his wife, who had a definite taste for youth, got along famously with all the neighborhood children who were old enough to get into trouble. Furthermore, he had no idea that he was, in fact, his wife’s first servant and that, despite the fact that he claimed to be a boss, he performed the tasks no one wanted to do, the tasks that would have discouraged the most persistent workers.

That afternoon, smiling as usual, his sweater unbuttoned as always to give his large belly some air, Nirdinsko was in the small placement agency office. He was locked in serious conversation with his wife, named Alexandra in honor of the empress, despite her lack of any resemblance to that enormous shrew.

Convinced of his insight, Nirdinsko stated, “I tell you, that boy will do the job. He’s stupid, half deaf, three-quarters mute, completely obtuse, incapable of anything, thin enough to discourage a pope, and ugly enough to cause six women to miscarry at the same time!”

The fat Alexandra nodded, hesitating, and her husband continued, “I tell you, he’s a superior servant! We won’t find any better than him.” Yet, Alexandra remained unconvinced.

Running out of arguments, Nirdinsko proposed, “Do you want to interview him again? Do you want to see for yourself, if you don’t trust me?”

Alexandra, who was an intelligent person and trusted no one but herself when it came to managing the placement agency, nodded in approval. It was obvious that nothing her husband said mattered. Moreover, perhaps she was not wrong and Nirdinsko himself, when he let down his guard, had no problem confessing that his wife was endowed with qualities far superior to his.

Nirdinsko, who wanted above all for his wife to take an interest in his favorite, pressed on a bell. The door to the small parlor opened and an old woman, the agency assistant, asked, “What?”

“Send Alexis in.”

A moment later, the office door opened again and a tall young man, in his 20s, entered the room, clumsy and awkward, and walked toward the desk where Alexandra sat.

“Come in, young man,” Nirdinsko ordered.

The young man took a step forward, an enormous hat still on his head.

Alexandra intervened, “Come on, now, take that hat off!”

The newcomer removed his hat and, with obvious satisfaction, wringing it this way and that.

“What’s your name?” Alexandra started.

“Alexis.”

“Alexis what?”

“No, not Alexis What, just Alexis!”

“I understand, but Alexis is your first name. What’s your family name?”

No response.

The agency manager brightened up and winked in response when her husband clicked his tongue in satisfaction.

She started her interview immediately.

“What do you know how to do? Are you a cook?”

“No.”

“Are you a valet?”

“No.”

“Do you know how to drive?”

“No.”

“So, you’re a gardener.”

“No.”

“Well, then, what can you do?”

The extraordinary Alexis, who was laughing stupidly, seemed completely unaware of the irony hidden behind the question. Did he even understand the questions they were asking him? It seemed obvious that he did not, given the stupid way he continually giggled.

His face was both flat and bloated. Moreover, he wore an enormous bandage around his jaw, required no doubt as a result of some horrible toothache. His hair was uncombed, long strands hanging over his poorly shaved face with an extraordinarily bushy mustache.

Obviously, the unfortunate Russian belonged to the lowest class of people. He must have come to St. Petersburg by chance and no one was less qualified than he was to hold the sensitive position of servant in a large house.

“What do you know how to do?” Alexandra repeated.

Missing the point of the question, Alexis replied, “I want to make a lot of money.”

His demand was so out of place that the agency manager burst into laughter. She regained her composure and asked, “How much do you want to earn?”

But the young man, who was obviously incapable of intelligent thought, of setting a reasonable figure, bypassed the discussion. Stubbornly, he repeated, “I want to make a lot of money.”

Then, as if he had suddenly taken them into his confidence, the idiot launched into a monologue that seemed as if it would never end.

He came from very far away, the outer reaches of Siberia. There, people were dying of hunger.

Farming was no good. So, the pope had told him to go to St. Petersburg, where people made money. And he did just that. He wanted to make a fortune in ten years. Then he would marry his cousin, who had a pair of cows that were perfect for pulling a plough.

Then, Alexis repeated again, “I want to make a lot of money!”

Obviously, they would have to get rid of him. Alexandra showed him the door.

“That’s fine, young man. Away with you!”

As soon as he had left, Nirdinsko asked his wife, “What do you think? Isn’t he perfect?”

“It would seem so,” Alexandre said, thoughtfully. “He’s a superior imbecile.”

The placement agency manager opened a drawer in her work table and took out a letter.

“No one will be able to reproach us,” she added. “That’s exactly what they’re looking for.”

She read a letter out loud, demonstrating that she was never wrong:

Madame: I would appreciate it if you would find a valet for me since I am obliged to replace my own and have had to fire my old serving woman. I would like the boy you send me to be a complete moron. I need servants who are completely lacking in intelligence; otherwise they might be inclined to take advantage of the secrets they might overhear while in service. Select a perfect imbecile for me, with strong arms. I would accept someone who is one-eyed, deaf and mute. Moreover, you know what satisfies me since I have used your agency to hire servants on many occasions.

Alexandra read this strange letter, repeating the signature out loud, “The name is perfectly legible. It’s signed: Boris Pokroff, head of the Tsar’s secret police!”

For a moment, Alexandra remained pensive, re-reading the letter. She finally made a decision and it was in keeping with her husband’s projects.

“You’re right,” she declared. Alexis is the perfect imbecile Mr. Pokroff needs. We’ll send him over.”

Most certainly, Alexandra would have been most concerned if, that very evening, she could have climbed up to the attic the extraordinary Alexis, the superior imbecile, had rented in the city. On his own, now, the young man had transformed. Slow and stupid earlier, he had become lively, nimble, even intelligent, a flame burning in his eyes. Once the door to his attic had closed, he became a totally different creature. Alexi danced a little polka. Then, standing before the washstand, he dipped a cloth into the water and rubbed his face vigorously with it. Soon, the cloth was stained with all sorts of colors: red, blue, black, a thick paste coating it. This simply showed that Alexis had been in disguise, something that was proven beyond a shadow of a doubt a few seconds later when he tore off the wig he had been wearing, along with the fake mustache that had rendered him unrecognizable.

Transformed, Alexis looked nothing at all like the sublime imbecile that had seemed to satisfy all of Pokroff’s conditions.

So, who was Alexis?

Of course, if Juve had seen him he would have certainly recognized him.

If Helene had only caught a glimpse, she would have been overwhelmed with painful emotions.

Alexis was Fandor and Fandor was in a fine mood!

“How perfect!” he told himself as he finished removing the make-up that coated his face. “What an excellent skill it is to be able to eavesdrop at doors. That’s how I learned the kind of valet Pokroff needed. A superior imbecile! Of course, I’ve taken on all sorts of disguises so far. I definitely had to try this one. A superior imbecile. A perfect dolt. I’ve obviously taken a step up. Hey, nothing should discourage me. Perhaps, one day, I’ll perform with the greats, while playing a dung collector!”

Fandor, who had finally washed the grime off, could go to bed with a clear mind. Once in bed, he took care to close his eyes. The journalist, who always found it very difficult to rise in the mornings, found it almost as hard to fall asleep at night.

Joking, he liked to say that he preferred not going to bed to having to get up early. And that was no lie, but profoundly true.

Jerome Fandor, in bed, gave free reign to his dreams while smoking a cigarette something which, in his case, revealed a sense of profound well-being.

“Now,” thought Jerome Fandor, “I’m going to have to keep my eyes peeled, as my good friend Bouzille, whom I have not seen in a long time, used to say. Tomorrow, at Pokroff’s house, I may have something very interesting to discover.”

What was Fandor’s plan? What projects did Juve’s intrepid friend have in mind?

There was nothing mysterious or extraordinary about Jerome Fandor’s presence in St. Petersburg, for anyone familiar with the courageous journalist’s most recent adventures, for someone who knew his deep sense of honor.

In fact, Fandor had been involved in the most tragic and moving of adventures. He had been there for the last sigh uttered by Natacha when, overcome by the cruel disease she believed she had caught, she fled to the top of the Alps.

At that time, Jerome Fandor learned that Natacha loved him. He was all the more overwhelmed by this knowledge since, naturally,

he felt nothing more than sympathy for the nihilist, as a result of the sincere love he still felt for Helene. Yet, he had learned the dying woman’s deepest secrets. She had asked him to announce her death to her father, Boris Pokroff, and, above all, to prevent, if he could, the attack the nihilists planned against the Tsar.

At that very moment, not knowing what had happened to Helene, and the tragic disdain that had caused her to believe he had betrayed his oaths, Fandor had set out immediately for Russia. Fandor was far too cautious, far too familiar with police investigations to take such a mission lightly. He surmised that Boris Pokroff had to have close ties with the nihilist. The police chief had to know that his daughter Natacha, was a formidable political conspirator.

So, how would Boris Pokroff welcome him?

The journalist decided it would be an excellent idea to find out more about the situation before going to see Natacha’s father. He spent a few days conducting a discrete investigation. Jerome Fandor had already had a few opportunities during the course of his eventful life to enjoy the benefits of luck, he now realized that fortune was smiling on him once again.

In fact, Jerome Fandor had no regrets about the time and effort he had spent spying on Boris Pokroff. He had made a few strange discoveries. He had uncovered a few surprising mysteries, alarming secrets, terrifying unlikelihoods, despite the fact that he usually worried about nothing. At that moment, Fandor had to wonder if he himself were not a victim, if he were not making some terrible mistake, if he had not gone mad.

“I’ll have a clear heart,” he said to himself.

Such a promise, made to himself, was a solemn oath for the journalist.

Fandor never gave up on an assignment once he had started. He never retreated from anything. Once he questioned something, he always managed to acquire an absolute certainty about it.

“I’ll get close to him,” Fandor thought. “I’ll investigate that man.”

And he would do everything it took to do just that. Good reporter that he was, Fandor managed, nine times out of ten, to find fantastic ruses to achieve his purposes. Consequently, without delay and knowing full well that Pokroff wanted to hire a stupid servant, he went to the Nirdinsko placement agency and played the fool.

Jerome Fandor was such an excellent actor, had been so sublimely dense, that the agency had sent him to Pokroff’s home the very next day.

Pokroff, obviously, had better things to do than waste time selecting his servants. After a brief interview, most similar to the one conducted by

Alexandra, Jerome Fandor found himself hired as a valet, a jack of all trades, by the redoubtable chief of the secret police.

“Young man,” Pokroff recommended, “You have two functions to perform here. The first is to sweep my office, without ever disturbing my papers. The second is to open the door when the bell rings. Apart from that, since you don’t know how to do anything, you will do nothing. Now, get to work!”

Jerome Fandor had played his role as a superior imbecile perfectly during this little speech. He had managed to tip over an ink pot and clean up the ink with a corner of the silk curtain that flowed from the top of the window. That done, he had laughed stupidly when Pokroff had raised his voice and dabbed at his eyes when the police chief announced that he was hiring him.

Pokroff must have been delighted with his servant’s stupidity.

On the other hand, was Jerome Fandor pleased with his new employment?

As he left the office the expression on the new servant’s face could only be called extraordinary. Jerome Fandor, who had been playing the role of an imbecile just a moment earlier, now looked energetic and determined. Despite his wig and his fake mustache, despite all the make-up applied to help him play the role of Alexis, Jerome Fandor had suddenly turned back into himself. Moreover, he grumbled in the throes of excitement.

Good Lord! Good Lord!” he muttered. “This is harder than trying to sneak up on an elephant, worse than trying to catch the moon in a fishing net. This is even harder than trying to find a police sergeant who is not an imbecile in Paris.”

And just as he was expressing his utter surprise with the most unseemly of comparisons, Pokroff called him back.

“Alexis?”

“Sir?”

Jerome Fandor’s face once again bore an idiotic expression.

“Dear boy, hurry up,” the police chief ordered. “You will sweep my office as I watch, after which you will man the front door. I’m expecting visitors.”

“Yes sir.”

“I’m called “His Excellency.”

“Yes, Sir His Excellency.”

You don’t say sir. You say ‘Yes, Your Excellency.’” 

Alexis remained silent and Pokroff did not insist.

Moreover, for a few minutes, the police chief had been staring intently at his new servant. What was his interest in Alexis? Possibly, despite his bravery and as a result of his particular situation, Pokroff might well be interested in knowing who entered his household as servants.

Suddenly, Pokroff called his servant, who was limply sweeping his office.

“Alexis!”

“Yes?”

Pokroff chewed at his lip. For a second, he saw Alexis standing in front of him and his appearance seemed to have impressed him terribly. Pokroff said nothing, however. He appeared lost in some secret emotion.

Then he gently ordered, “My friend, take the poker and stir up the fire.”

Alexis did not make the police chief repeat his order. He ran over to the stove, picked up the poker and, after opening the door, started to stir up the fire. Yet, as he perched over the fire, the face of the fake Alexis turned pale. What did Jerome Fandor feel? What did he think? Did he have any idea of the tragic events involving Boris Pokroff a few nights earlier?

It was possible since Jerome Fandor stood up and said, “Your Excellency! Why are there bones...?”

At that moment, Boris Pokroff literally jumped out of his seat.

“What did you say?” he asked.

Looking back down at the fire, Jerome Fandor insisted, “There are bones. What looks like a skull.”

And as he spoke, Fandor turned around. He looked at Boris Pokroff’s face and saw that it had turned livid. The smile on Fandor’s face at the very moment was extraordinary.

“That’s it,” he thought. “The other day, when I was on the roof, I recognized the characteristic odor coming from the chimney. And yet...”

At that moment, Pokroff stood up. The police chief walked over to the stove and rudely said, ‘You’re crazy Alexis! You see a skull in the stove? What does that mean?”

The two men looked at one another. The fake Alexis held his employer’s eyes and Boris Pokroff appeared ready to pounce on the servant.

It was as if some terrible tragedy were about to take place. Anyone entering the room would have guessed that the two men would soon be involved in a terrible struggle.

Yet, Pokroff regained control once again. Just as the so-called Alexis stood up, he gently said, “The door bell is ringing. Go and let them in.”

The order was formal, but would Jerome Fandor obey? Smiling, the fake Alexis stood up.

“Yes, Your Excellency,” he replied. But his tone of voice had changed and he no longer sounded like a superior imbecile.

“I’ll open the door and come right back.”

Of course,” Pokroff replied.

The chief of police, however, kept his hand obviously in his pocket and his eyes on the servant. But the man had suddenly turned respectful and backed out of the room. Pokroff left his hand in his pocket.

Fandor, on the other hand, crossed the floor and walked down the stairs that left to the ground floor and arrived at the door.

Meanwhile, Pokroff walked quickly over to the window.

“Escape. It would be a better end!

He walked over to the stove. “What is this story about a skull and bones? I’m sure there’s nothing left.”

Boris Pokroff bent over the stove and stirred the red coals with the poker and stood back up, angry.

“Of course, there’s nothing there. It was just a trap. The masks are off!”

Yet, while the chief of the Tsar’s secret police was having this little chat with himself, what had become of Alexis, or rather Jerome Fandor? The journalist was following orders and had gone to the front door.

“There’s no danger. I can leave him alone up there. I destroyed the window bolts myself last night. I know he can’t escape.”

Jerome Fandor, who seemed to consider Boris Pokroff a total wretch, reached the front door. He opened it wide. A woman stood there.

“What do you want, Miss?” he asked, concentrating solely on getting rid of the unwanted visitor.

Yet, as he raised his eyes to look at the young woman, he was overcome with an intense emotion.

‘My God!” he muttered.

The woman standing in front of him was none other than Helene. Jerome Fandor could not know that Helene had come to see the head of the secret police. But it was only natural that he should be surprised when he recognized her.

And the young woman was every bit as surprised. First, she had seen a servant who had looked at her with a complete lack of interest. Then he had spoken, making shivers run up and down her back.

“Good grief! I’m losing my mind!" she thought, her heart caught in a vise. “This is Fandor. This is my husband.”

Her husband! Under French law, Jerome Fandor was not her husband. The marriage he had contracted was void and then again Helene was not the type of woman to apply the letter of the law, to restrain a wandering husband by force. No, what provoked her suffering was the fact that, at that very moment, Helene recalled a recent vision, an abdominal vision. In the Alps, had she had not seen Jerome Fandor embracing Natacha? Yes, well then it was easy to guess what Fandor was dong in Boris Pokroff’s house. Naturally, he was there as a suitor. Obviously, he was acting as a valet to visit his future father-in-law.

Such an idea was obviously crazy. Yet, things were happening so fast that Helene had no time to recognize her own extraordinary blindness. She was suffering and, like any woman who is suffering, she was incapable of reason.

But Jerome Fandor took stock of the situation. Far from realizing what could be going through Helene’s mind, he stood up, convinced that she had not heard him and asked again,” What do you want, Miss?”

But at the very moment, vanity swept over Helene. She stiffened, refusing to acknowledge that she recognized the man standing in front of her. In a dry voice, she replied, “I would like to see Boris Pokroff.”

That was exactly what Fandor feared. Listening to the woman he adored, he clenched his teeth and replied, “His Excellency is not available.”

Helene insisted, “Give me paper and pen. I’ll write a message and he’ll see me.”

“No, Madam.” Fandor replied, closing the door on the dumbfounded woman.

Strength sapped, Helene leaned against the wall on the other side of the door for a moment.

“He doesn’t love me anymore. He pretended not to recognize me.”

“My God! My God! Do I have the strength it takes not to go after her? To take her in my arms, tell her of my love for her? That would be so right.”

At that moment, a voice rang out from the second storey.

“Alexis!”

It was Pokroff who had obviously heard the door close and was calling his valet.

Once again, Jerome Fandor stood up with an effort of will.

“Do your duty!” he grumbled. “You have to do your duty!”

Like a madman, Jerome Fandor climbed the stairs four at a time. How different this young man, fiery and raging, as he raced towards Boris

Pokroff’s office, was from the sublime imbecile the police chief was convinced he had hired as a valet.

Boris Pokroff, moreover, noticed the transformation. Sitting behind his desk, he asked in a tight voice, “What were you doing downstairs?”

The fake Alexis smiled. “I was celebrating my good fortune,” he replied.

And since Boris Pokroff was looking at him, uncomprehending, Jerome slowly repeated, “I was celebrating my good fortune since it allowed me to find you.”

“Find me?” Boris Pokroff said, his voice trembling. “What do you mean?”

Jerome Fandor took a step forward.

“No more masks!” he shouted abruptly, pointing a browning at his master. “No more masks! Boris Pokroff, I know who you are... You’re Fantomas!”

Boris Pokroff simply shrugged.



CHAPTER V - Raining Telegrams



“Mr. Juve, no one would recognize you!”

“Why not, my good fellow?”

“Because you look like some wild man, if I may say so.”

“That’s really too kind of you.”

Oh, Mr. Juve, don’t take it the wrong way. I had no intention to offend you. It’s just that you’re all tanned.”

“Well, I’ve become a knight and spend my days under the burning sun.”

Juve was in Paris, in the Prefect’s offices.

With his usual good cheer, he was chatting with one of the civil servants who, assigned to the Prefect’s office, had known him a long time and could be permitted such pleasantries.

Juve, it was true, had changed a great deal. The extraordinary adventure he had just come back from in Mexico, chasing after Helene, a trip that had ended in Switzerland, under the snow, pursuing Fantomas, had tired the excellent police officer somewhat and his face bore unquestionable traces of the hardships he had endured.

Juve, however, had not changed. He was still filled with energy, still lively and could hardly stay still, pacing back and forth, chain-smoking cigarettes, and grumbling over and over.

Juve had tracked Mr. Havard to the Prefect’s office, after missing him by five minutes at his home.

Juve had not been in Paris long, only 24 hours since he had jumped off the train from Switzerland and, yet, he already seemed eager to set off again, giving his card to Mr. Havard two or three times, begging to see him for an emergency.

Unfortunately, as usual, Mr. Havard was bogged down with work. Moreover, his character had not changed during Juve’s absence. He had not become any less conniving, any less ambitious and, that morning, as a result, he was even busier than usual since he had to draft a report to be submitted directly to the Minister.

Location 1024

All this meant that, for once, Juve had to sit in the waiting room. The police officer paced back and forth in front of Mr. Havard’s office, grumbling naturally, saying, “This makes no sense whatsoever! I bet that Havard is busy drafting wordy sentences... What the devil! That’s not his trade. It should be handled by some scribe. He should do police work since he is a police officer.”

Juve, who had been following that rule for 20 years, had encountered the most extraordinary dangers, the most unlikely perils during his adventures in the police, did have some grounds for complaining.

He was so renowned, in fact, had played such an important role that, to put it simply, Mr. Havard could certainly have set aside his work for once and met with him. Yet, 20 minutes passed without the office door opening. Juve was still waiting. And he grew so impatient that, Juve, with his unbearable cheek, decided to shake things up. Despite the hostility of the clerk, who was already expecting the worst, Juve quietly walked over to the police chief's door, pressed a finger against it, opened the door quickly, and walked in.

Mr. Havard was at his desk. He looked up, in surprise.

“So, it’s you?”

“It’s me, Juve?

The police chief looked upset. Obviously, Juve was no tiresome intruder who could be sent packing. As soon as he had entered, he had to be welcomed. Mr. Havard regretted this situation believing, incorrectly, that it would be far better for him to quietly complete his report.

Juve for his part had fallen heavily into an armchair.

“So?" he started. “What’s new, chief?”

“Nothing at all my good man. I should be the one asking you that.”

Nevertheless, Mr. Havard found the opportunity to exact a little vengeance against Juve. He asked, “Did you arrest Fantomas?”

But Juve was not the man to take offence for so little.

“Good grief, no!” he retorted. “Once again, that villain was able to slip through my fingers. Yet, I sense that he’s starting to run out of steam and he won’t get much farther.”

“Let’s hope so!” said Mr. Havard, smiling.

At that moment, the police chief, resigned to having to put off writing his report, suddenly pushed aside the papers in front of him and asked, “So, Juve, what’s new? Did you find Helene?”

“Yes.”

“Is your friend Fandor with you?”

“No.”

“So, what happened?”

Juve slowly shrugged. He was not a man to feel embarrassed and not someone who would try to hide the truth.

He replied, “Well, Mr. Havard, what happened is very simple. I’ve had victories and defeats, more victories than defeats, moreover. I found Helene but I let Fantomas escape to Mexico. After returning to France, I escorted Helene to the Alps to meet with Jerome Fandor, her husband, and we let Fantomas escape again. Unfortunately, I lost Helene and Fandor in the struggle.”

Juve said this as quietly as possible. Mr. Havard could not help but smile.

“Dammit” he grumbled. “You have a talent for this! You lost both Fandor and Helene? How did you manage that?”

Obviously, the police chief’s curiosity was piqued. Juve realized this. But what did that matter? He had no intention of hiding anything from his superior.

The extraordinary police officer did not hesitate at all. He quickly informed Mr. Havard about the most recent events. He told him about the extraordinary dangers he had faced in Mexico, he explained the risks run by Helene and how he, Juve, had managed to save the young woman from a horrible death.

“Unfortunately, that bandit escaped. He fled

to Switzerland and as Helene and I were slowly returning, after taking some time to recover from our hardships, Fantomas was already hunkered down in the Alps, pursuing his dastardly deeds.

“When we arrived there, Helene wanted to go and find Fandor on her own. She was a woman in love and I gave in to her. But, I was wrong to do so since, just a few hours later, I had to accept the obvious.”

“The obvious what?” asked Mr. Havard.

“A sinister fact,” confessed Juve. “That I had missed capturing Fantomas and that Helene and Fandor had completely disappeared.”

That was, in fact, the truth. At that moment in time, Juve had no idea where Helene and Fandor were. The young woman had set out secretly, like a mad woman, for Russia, because she wanted to protect the Tsar and she had said nothing to Juve because she was suffering from a terrible jealousy that had overwhelmed her when she saw Fandor with Natacha.

Fandor, for his part, upset by Natacha’s confidences, had decided, on his own, to intervene in Russia. He had no idea Juve and Helene were in the country, since they had arrived there in secret, in order to give him a welcome surprise. He left without saying a word, merely sending Juve a telegram, which the police officer had received upon arriving in Paris.

The telegram was not explicit since Fandor had simply informed Juve that there was nothing to worry about, that he was setting off on a mission and that he would return as soon as he could.

Mr. Havard nodded as he listened to all these details, looking convinced. Despite his profound apathy, in fact, despite his indifference as a meticulous civil servant, Mr. Havard could not forego a certain sense of regard for the heroic Juve who always spoke of battles, who always risked his life and seemed to find it quite natural, entirely logical, to dedicate himself entirely to his profession.

Mr. Havard cast about unsuccessfully for a compliment.

“You... you’ve earned my admiration...”

Then he jumped up after glancing discretely at the clock and said, “Dammit, how time flies! So, Juve, what can I do for your?”

Juve had been waiting for this question. An ironic smile played over his lips and he said, “A little and a lot.”

His response was so enigmatic, Mr. Havard asked, “A few more details, please, Juve. What do you want from me?”

Just then, Juve calmly removed his coat, folded it with extreme care and hung it over the back of a chair.

“Mr. Havard,” he explained. “I’m quietly waiting for you to give me some money.”

Obviously, this was an extraordinary request. Mr. Havard’s eyes grew round in surprise.

“Money?” he protested. “Why?”

“Because I don’t have any.”

“What do you mean?”

“Traveling is expensive,” Juve replied, voice dripping with judgment.

Since these aimless comments would easily have gone on for some time without any concrete progress, Mr. Havard decided to take charge of the matter.

“Well,” he said. “You don’t have any money. That’s a problem, Juve, but it’s not serious. Your appointments await you.”

“I need more than that.”

“Unfortunately, my dear friend...”

“I don’t want to hear that.”

“So, what do you want?’

Juve’s smile grew broader and broader. He looked at Mr. Havard, eyes sparkling with intelligence, apparently amused.

“Well, now, the time has come.”

Then he laughed, almost despite himself and continued, “My dear Mr. Havard, I have some extraordinary projects in mind, a complete campaign plan. I am determined to finish Fantomas off, in one way of another. I want to put an end to his truly legendary exploits. And to do that, I need money. Let me make myself perfectly clear. I don’t need money for my personal needs. If that were the case, I would not be so insistent. The money I need will be used for my research. That’s what I need the money for, Mr. Havard, so please give me some.”

Never before had Juve spoken so openly about such matters, which usually left him quite indifferent. Mr. Havard had no idea what was going on and felt overwhelmed with surprise.

“But,” he protested at the end of the tirade. “I have no problems with giving you money, but where do you think I’ll get it? I can’t do anything for you.”

“Yes, you can,” Juve replied quietly.

And, surprised as he was by this response, Mr. Havard fell silent, wondering where Juve was headed with all this. Juve, still calm, but displaying an authority that proved he was not speaking out of the top of his hat, was digging through his pocket.

Soon, he pulled out a newspaper, which was obviously a few weeks old. He rifled through it, looking for a page, running his finger over the columns and finally read this official notice:

For his good and loyal services and in order to facilitate his research which he is about to undertake, the Prefecture has voted to give Mr. Juve, Senior Police Inspector, a subsidy of...

Mr. Havard did not give Juve the time to finish. “Well,” he said, leaping up from his chair,

“What are you up to Juve? I know full well that we voted to give you a subsidy. But you don’t know what we did with it. We gave it to...”

It was Juve’s turn to smile.

“We, actually you, you gave it to Fantomas, Mr. Havard, and Fantomas made a superb fool of you, convincing you that he was Juve. I know that, for a fact, but what do you want me to do? An error was made. You made a mistake. Too bad! I need money for the public interest. I’m merely claiming the amount that was promised to me and I did not receive. I repeat: I really need this money to try something. The Prefecture may be so poor that I have no doubt it would refuse to pay me if I were to ask for it. On the other hand, I have no scruples about requiring them to pay me what I am owed since I have decided to use it for the good of all.”

As he listened to Juve, Mr. Havard turned red, then pale. He faced a terrible impasse. He knew full well that Juve was right, that they had voted to give him the money. Juve had not touched it since Mr. Havard had been stupid enough to let Fantomas steal it.

Everyone would support Juve if he claimed the money and Mr. Havard could not refuse to pay him. How could he avoid ridicule by claiming that he, the police chief, had been duped by Fantomas like an idiot?

“Juve, Juve” Mr. Havard said. “What you’re doing is truly not very nice! I don’t know how to handle this matter. I don’t have any funds at my disposal and, on the other hand...”

Juve stood up. He took a small piece of paper from his wallet and handed it to Mr. Havard.

“Do you recognize this?"

Mr. Havard recognized the piece of paper since he had signed it. It was a service order that Mr. Havard had signed in a moment of pique, giving Juve a brigade of inspectors that would be kept busy on stupid tasks. It was clear that the order was inspired by jealously and that the purpose was to prevent Juve from continuing his pursuit of Fantomas.

Trembling, Mr. Havard asked, “Well, Juve?”

“Well!” said Juve, “ this piece of paper bothers me. I have better things to do than track down minor criminals. As a result, Mr. Havard, this is what I propose. You set me loose for one year. You give me 12 months to handle the cases I find interesting. In exchange for that concession, I agree not to hassle you for the money you owe me.”

Juve had no need to add anything else. Mr. Havard’s face lit up. He tore up the order, which Juve had handed him, and threw the pieces into the wastepaper basket.

“Agreed!” he said. “You’ll do what you want.”

Juve left the police chief’s office a moment later, smiling.

“What a strange turn of events!” he though. “Havard and I just played an amusing scene. I know he hates me. And yet, we exchange polite words. Another thing. We’re both police officers and yet we behave like two villains. For my part, I admit that I gently blackmailed Havard. I tore my freedom from him by threatening to go after the money, something I never would have done since I know full well that he has already paid it!”

And, with that, Juve concluded his philosophical meanderings.

At that moment, Juve was walking past the docks along the Seine at a good pace. Despite himself, he enjoyed the charms of that incomparable Parisian landscape. Although it was still winter, the weather was superb, with a blue sky and brilliant sun. He leaned on the railing and looked around, thinking, “Good Lord! And to consider this the sinister truth! To think that this immense city, this admirable Paris, which reigns over the entire world... To think that this city, where exasperated civilization brushes against decadence, to think that this world, filled with pride in its inventions, its science, its wealth, its refinements, to think that all this is under the heel of a man, a man I know, a man I’m tracking, one I fight and can’t vanquish!”

Juve held back a sob and, despite himself, thought he saw a fantastic vision appear before his eyes. A colossus, a giant, a character both

legendary and superhuman! It was a man, dressed correctly in a black suit, wearing a tall hat and white gloves. Over his face, he wore a black wolf mask, a mask symbolizing his mysterious ways, his shadowy behavior, his criminal and evil royalty!

This man, this immense giant, seemed to dominate the city, to step over it with a single stride. One of his feet crushed the rooftops. The other leg disappeared into the infinity of the horizon! Genial and monstrous, the character dominated all of Paris, holding it at his mercy, under the threat of his dagger! He walked past, sowing misfortune, death and ruin. Laughing. He was the master, the master of all!

And Juve, despite himself, shivered as he recalled the fantastic character, naming him in a rage that made his voice tremble, “Oh, Fantomas, Fantomas. Evil demon, Criminal genius, Master of fear, malevolent inventor of the most frightful tortures. Is it true then, colossus, that I will never manage to overturn you one day, chain you up, deliver you to the executioner, to the immobility of the tomb, to the powerlessness of the grave?”

Then Juve stood up. A burst of pride filled his mind. Faced with the terrible, supernatural vision he had just seen, he answered his own questions.

No! It was not true. It was false. It was impossible! Juve was certain he would vanquish, that a time would come when justice would win and crime would be punished. He could not allow himself to be beaten. He must not fear the size of the task or its difficulties.

Juve gave that calm, ironic smile that made people say he was incapable of emotion.

“Victory without peril is a triumph without glory!” he murmured. “One day, people will tell their children: he was a monstrous criminal and a brave policeman rid humanity of him. Let’s get to work!”

Juve had not spent more than five minutes there. When he stood up, however, something had changed inside him. He had suddenly forgotten the years spent fighting in vain. It seemed to him that a new phase in his life was starting. Success no longer seemed questionable and eventually he would achieve the triumph which had been his goal for so long.

“Fantomas! Fantomas! It's just the two of us!”

A carriage drove past. Juve hailed it. Suddenly, he was in a rush to return to his small office on Rue Tardieu. He needed to be alone and think.

A few minutes later, Juve closed the door to his favorite place. He picked up a cigarette and, seated in this armchair, stared ahead, seeing nothing, deep in thought.

“Where is Fantomas,” Juve asked. “How can I find him? How can I interfere with his plans, upset his projects, and release the world once and for all?”

Of course, the problem seemed simple when put in so many words. He had to find the villain and stop him. The reality was much more complex. Would it be possible to find Fantomas if the man wanted to disappear? Was there the shadow of a hope? He seemed impossible to capture, always fleeing, always knowing just when to disappear, to take off, even when covered with blood and satisfied with his crimes.

“Let’s sum this up,” Juve thought, in an effort to avoid evoking everything that was swirling about in his mind about the fantastic legend of Fantomas. Juve wanted to focus on studying small, specific events, unquestionable acts, that were rigorously certain, that could provide a detail, a clue.

“Let's see, where was Fantomas last seen? I know. Near the Croisset Hotel. I know that he threw himself into a luge and set off down the mountain...”

Just then, a knock at the door interrupted Juve’s thoughts.

“Jean” Juve shouted. “Leave me be. I don’t want to be disturbed.”

Unfortunately, Jean was a model servant. He knew when he should obey, but he also was aware that, on certain occasions, disobedience was acceptable. That morning, he ignored Juve’s warning.

“Sir!" he said. “There’s a telegram for you.”

“Slip it under the door.”

Juve imagined that it was some unimportant bit of news. He frequently received telegrams. Usually they came from the Police department, for the most part indicating some stupid tip Juve ignored. Yet, he had to make sure.

Juve stood up, picked up the paper, and glanced at it. The expression on his face changed immediately.

“Good Lord!” he exclaimed.

He read the telegram out loud.

Come to St. Petersburg immediately. Stop. Need you. Stop. The Tsar's treasure is at risk. Stop. Fandor. Stop.

In all honesty, Juve did not believe his eyes. How could Fandor be calling him from St. Petersburg, Russia? And calling on him to save the Tsar’s treasure? What did that mean? Deeply disturbed, Juve threw himself back into his armchair. He closed his eyes, thinking about this new mystery.

“Fandor needs me...”

Another knock at the door. Juve shuddered.

“Jean,” he shouted! “Let me be!”

“But, sir, there’s another telegram.”

Juve leapt from his chair. Obviously, it was most likely that this telegram would be unimportant. But could he count on that? He tore it open, turning from pale to red. And read the telegram.

Urgent. Stop. Come to St. Petersburg. Stop. I know your reputation. Stop. You are my only hope. Stop. A woman in love beseeches you. Stop. Come to protect the chief of the secret police. Stop. I await you. Stop. Grand-duchess Ekaterina. Stop.

“I don’t understand a thing,” grumbled Juve. “Who is this grand-duchess? Why should I protect her lover, particularly if he’s a police officer? Everyone wants me to go to St. Petersburg!”

Juve walked slowly back to his chair. He had barely sat down when the elderly Jean, still impassive and calm, appeared once again.

“Sir,” the servant announced. “The flood continues.”

“What flood,” asked Juve.

“The flood of telegrams. Here are two more.”

Jean carried two telegrams. By some strange coincidence, four telegrams had arrived at Juve’s place at the same time. The first two had already upset the policeman. What would he learn from the two latest? Juve shook as he opened them.

The first telegram he read filled him with emotion:

Rush to St. Petersburg. Stop. You alone can save a human life. Stop. I hold terrible secrets. Stop. We have to protect the Tsar. Stop. Helene. Stop.

“Helene! Helene!” Juve shrieked, bewildered. “Now, Helene is summoning me.”

He almost forgot the fourth telegram. It was a little longer than the previous ones. The message was so surprising that Juve had to read it over several times.

We trust you. Stop. We are nihilists. Stop. Our suffering is terrible. Stop. You alone can save us. Stop. Come to St. Petersburg. Stop. Come. Stop. You have to stop Fantomas. Stop.

Juve read a series of Russian names that meant nothing to him. His mind was elsewhere. His lips mouthed a name, a horrible name, over and over, “Fantomas! Fantomas!”

Was it true that he would have to face the terrible Master of Horror, yet again?



CHAPTER VI - The Rope-maker



In response to the monstrous accusation made by his servant, Boris Pokroff merely shrugged in scorn. He did not seem surprised, or upset by the accusation. He did not look like a man disgusted by such a suspicion. He did not look at all overwhelmed with fear at the thought of being recognized.

No, with perfect indifference, absolute calm, and complete peace of mind Boris Pokroff frowned. One would never have thought that he was the one being referred to, that he would be accused of being the formidable and terrifying Fantomas.

Fandor, however, was panting. The journalist was far from as calm as his adversary. Although he felt no fear at the danger he obviously faced, Jerome Fandor shivered. He pointed his browning at Boris Pokroff, the man he accused of being Fantomas, his hand shaking.

“So!” thought Fandor. “The decisive moment is finally at hand. Will I have the honor of his capture?”

As he mastered his nerves, controlled the perfectly natural emotion that had swept over him, Jerome Fandor repeated:

“Off with your mask, Pokroff! I recognized you!

You’re Fantomas!”

Then he coldly added, “Don’t move. Don’t count on the slightest weakness on my part. I’m determined to shoot. I’ll put you down like a dog!”

Pokroff shrugged again. Maintaining his indifference, he said, “You’re crazy, I imagine. Well, too bad for that. No one reasons with a mad man. What do you want from me?”

It was, in fact, a strange scene. Fandor himself, despite the seriousness of his predicament, realized that things were not going as they should have. He had expected rage. He had expected the villain he faced to betray himself through some gesture. Or perhaps furious denial? But there was nothing like that. His adversary’s indifference was ominously out of tune, a false note that rang out strangely in the silence. Disconcerted by the superior composure of the man he threatened with his browning, Jerome Fandor replied, “Fantomas, I want to take you in. I want to deliver you to justice, which will deliver you to the hangman. I’ve been fighting you for years, years during which you spawned evil, with impunity, without remorse, pity or mercy. Well the time has come. You’re trapped. Be a good sport, Fantomas and surrender!”

Perfectly calm, Boris listened to the young man’s speech, the choppy phrases he uttered with increasing nervousness. He made no move. He seemed unafraid of the browning pointed at him.

He stood motionless, like someone completely unaware of the importance of the time passing.

In a completely calm voice, he replied, “I don’t understand you at all. Your words are most puzzling. Surrender? To whom? It’s stupid for you to claim that I’m Fantomas!”

Fandor interrupted him, “So you deny it then? Are you so base, Fantomas, that you want to discuss your personality with me? Are you such a rogue that you would try to avoid your responsibilities? Come on, that’s just unworthy of you!”

At the moment, and despite himself, Jerome Fandor was honoring the mastermind of crime. Suddenly, Pokroff seemed to be struck by the young man’s words. Although Pokroff had remained impassive up to that point, his face suddenly turned pale and he appeared to lose his calm.

He said, “Well, that’s it. Off with the masks. I am Fantomas and while you recognized me, I recognized you as well. You’re Jerome Fandor.”

The journalist shivered. So he had not been wrong. He was facing the criminal mastermind, the monstrous torturer, the abominable genius who had invented so many nameless horrors. Fantomas was finally at his mercy!

“Yes, I’m Jerome Fandor,” he said.

Then he repeated, “And you’re Fantomas?”

“Quite right!”

Boris Pokroff, or rather Fantomas, since Pokroff had just admitted his true identity, remained calm. A slight trembling of his lips barely revealed that he too was experiencing real emotion. But he did not remain perturbed.

He said, “So, we’ve recognized one another. Fine. But that’s not enough. Fandor, you asked me to surrender. You’re going too fast. Things just aren’t that simple. Moreover, I have something to ask you.”

Jerome Fandor shook his head.

“There’s no point," he said. “You’ve taken advantage of us too many times. You’ve escaped from us too often, Fantomas! I’m resolved. You’ll get nothing from me!"

“Excuse me,” said Fantomas. “I need some information.”

“What?”

“Information that you can hardly refuse to give me. How did you recognize me?”

Fandor smiled. In truth, it was a strange series of events, a fantastic adventure that had led him to discover that Boris Pokroff and Fantomas were one and the same. While Jerome Fandor had been investigating Boris Pokroff, a man he considered only as the father of the nihilist Natacha, who had died in his arms, he had been surprised to note the strange attitude adopted by the man.

One evening, Jerome Fandor heard suspicious sounds coming from the room. He also observed smoke pouring from the chimney. He climbed onto the roof, collected some of the soot from the chimney, and decided, without a shadow of a doubt, that a body had been burned in the fireplace. But whose? Jerome Fandor would have spent a rather long time determining this if a multitude of coincidences had not put him on the right track.

He had noticed that Pokroff dismissed his servants abruptly. He learned that, after sustaining a minor injury, he had changed doctors. Moreover, he had spent two days locked up in his home. But all this meant little, proving only that Pokroff had committed murder. Yet, this initial discovery was followed by another, more important one. As Fandor was lurking discretely around the house, he learned that Boris Pokroff had had a package delivered to him from France and that he had declared to customs that it contained wigs. Jerome Fandor was strangely troubled by this piece of news. So, he found a way to get into Pokroff's residence. He spied on Pokroff constantly. And while keeping watch over the man, Jerome Fandor quickly made an extraordinary discovery.

Pokroff, Natacha' s father, had been an honest chef of the secret police. However, a few days earlier, the unfortunate Pokroff had been killed. It was his body that had been burned in the fireplace, his bones that had been found in the traces of soot in the chimney. But who had assassinated Pokroff?

It easy to imagine! Boris Pokroff’s murderer was another Boris Pokroff, the very man who had replaced his victim, the man who, skillfully made up, had fearlessly assumed the place of the dead man! Boris Pokroff was dead, but another Boris Pokroff still existed, usurping the other man’s personality, titles and functions. Who other than Fantomas would have the audacity to do that?

Gradually, Jerome Fandor had arrived at the conclusion, “Fantomas is posing as Boris Pokroff!”

Jerome Fandor, with extraordinary courage, with well-thought-out audacity, had immediately decided to make the most of his discovery.

Initially, and he was most likely not far off the mark, he decided that Fantomas had intended to rob the Tsar’s treasury, which he was specifically assigned to watch over as part of his duties. That’s when Fandor had wired Juve to come.

Yet, that was still not enough. While the certainty that Juve would soon arrive in Russia should calm Fandor a little, he still trembled at the thought that, from one second to another, something irreparable could occur. Such as Fantomas fleeing.

Jerome Fandor strove to keep his prey in view. He knew that the so-called Boris Pokroff was looking for a servant. He was not unaware that the head of the secret police was looking for a particularly stupid servant, one who would not uncover Pokroff’s machinations.

Knowing that, Jerome Fandor did not hesitate a second. He would be that servant. Pokroff would hire him. Things had worked out very well. Jerome Fandor had been hired. He would most likely have waited patiently, played his role, mastered his impatience until Juve arrived if a fortuitous incident, impossible to predict, had not caused him to take sudden action.

A few seconds earlier, Jerome Fandor had been abruptly surprised by Helene’s arrival. He had felt afraid for the young woman who was asking to see the head of the secret police. Tortured by concern, he had lost patience. He rushed into the room where he had left Fantomas and, a victim of his legitimate anger, he cried out, “Off with the masks!”

This was all most surprising and could justifiably intrigue Fantomas, who could have no idea which clues had set Jerome Fandor on his trail. So, Fandor was not surprised by Fantomas’ question. It seemed natural to him. However, he was determined not to give him a satisfactory answer. At that moment, one thought filled Fandor’s mind. “I’ve got my browning pointed at this wretch. He can’t make a move without my permission. That’s all that matters. I’m determined to show him no pity. I have only one thing to do. I must not let him go.”

So, Jerome Fandor replied, “You’ll learn that at your trial, Fantomas. For the time being, I don’t have to answer you."

Fiercely, Jerome Fandor ordered, “Hands up, so I can cuff you!"

“No, “Fantomas replied.

The criminal’s refusal was abrupt, categorical.

Jerome Fandor had not expected that and was violently surprised.

“You refuse to obey me?"

At the same time, he armed his weapon, the safety lock snapping, ready to fire.

Fantomas appeared unmoved.

“I do,” he simply said.

And as a spark burned in Fandor’s eyes, as he prepared to shoot, Fantomas, playing with danger, scorning death, said, “You’ll look ridiculous, Fandor. I’m not moving. Don’t shoot. Listen to me.”

Fantomas was truly a man in all meanings of the word. Regardless of the circumstances, regardless of the events that occurred, of the peril he faced, he still had a way of speaking, or being heroic, of forcing respect.

Although he was determined to shoot, Fandor did not.

“What do you have to say to me?” he said.

“I have a story to tell you.”

Still calm, standing less than 20 cm from Fandor’s browning, Fantomas closed his eyes for a second, like a story-teller mentally preparing an anecdote intended for an attentive audience.

“My dear Fandor,” Fantomas started in a quiet, mocking tone. “I would like to bring a brief memory back to your mind. You’ve seen Juve recently. So, he must have told you what I’m about to relate...”

“You’ve got three minutes,” said Fandor.

“That’s much more than I need,” retorted Fantomas.

Perfectly still, mindful of the death sentence imposed by the weapon pointed at him, Fantomas said, “Some time ago, I was being pursued by Juve. So, I played a role. As far as everyone was concerned, I was a personality and no one, other than Juve, suspected me. Juve, however, was wrong about one thing. He thought that I was not on my guard. But I always am. The result will prove that...”

“Excuse me,” Fandor interrupted. “But what’s the point of all this?”

Fantomas shrugged.

“Patience!” he said. “You’ll see. One day, Juve decided to arrest me. So, he summoned Mr. Mix. At that time, I was posing as Mr. Mix and, bit by bit, while chatting with me, he allowed himself to wane ironic. Suddenly, Juve cast off his mask, removing mine as well. He shouted, ‘You’re Fantomas!’ Good grief, Fandor, I must admit it had all worked a little faster than I had thought. I had not been certain that I would be arrested that evening. So, since I was surprised, I reached into my pocket to take out my weapon and kill Juve...”

“Wretch,” Fandor roared.

Fantomas did not respond to the insult. Peacefully, he smiled. Yet there was something deeply disturbing about his smile. Despite himself, Fandor felt troubled. He knew Fantomas too well, in fact, to ignore the fact that his good humor meant no good.

Visibly, Fantomas was amused. Why? He had no reason to be cheerful. He had been caught! Jerome Fandor stiffened, with a sudden surge of emotion.

“Enough!” he said. “Your three minutes are up.

You’ve been stringing me along, but enough is enough. Hands up!”

“No!” said Fantomas.

And, as Fandor approached him face pale with emotion, ready to shoot, Fantomas shrugged.

“I said no and I’ll say it again. Furthermore, I wasn’t lying, Fandor, when I claimed that I had perfected Juve’s technique. You have the means, don’t you, to force my obedience, your revolver... That revolver makes you feel calm, convinced that I’m at your mercy. So, it was a good thing I let you keep it. Yet, I have a much more powerful reason for refusing. So, try to shoot!”

Jerome Fandor grew livid. Given the criminal’s extraordinary mockery, he knew something was up. He pulled desperately on the trigger. The weapon did not go off.

Fantomas said, “You see, I’m in control here. I let you keep the revolver, but I removed the bullets.”

Then, with dazzling speed and marvelous agility, surprising Fandor, Fantomas leap, then rolled on the ground. He was so swift that Fandor, who rushed at him, grabbed at nothing but air as Fantomas stood up, on the other side of the room, and pushed a button.

Two men appeared almost immediately. And Fantomas, who was still Boris Pokroff in their eyes, issued an order.

“Grab that man. Bind him. He tried to assassinate me!’

It all happened so fast that Fandor had no time to protest. Just as he opened his mouth to cry out, to shout the truth at the two police offices, that Boris Pokroff was in fact Fantomas, he thought of something that forced him to remain silent.

What could he do, in fact? Would the officers take him solely at his word?

If he shouted, “Boris Pokroff is Fantomas, they would certainly mock him. If he wanted to fight, if he tried to resist, one against three, he would no doubt make his situation worse.

Jerome Fandor, moreover, did not want to lower himself to fighting in front of Fantomas. He was trapped. Vanquished. He would accept his fate with a dignity that would impress the wretch.

“Well played!" Fandor said.

Fantomas smiled. “Thank you for the compliment!" he replied.

The guards, however stared at him, dumbfounded and Fantomas realized he should not give them the time to wonder.

“Well,” he said abruptly. “What are you waiting for? Don’t you understand? He’s an assassin and will be a rope-maker in three days?”

The guards turned pale. They rushed at Fandor, bound him tightly and carried him off.

Fandor looked back. One last time he looked Boris Pokroff in the eyes, as he stood in the middle of his office, and saw the wretch smile. Fantomas had triumphed yet again and had managed to outwit his valiant enemies. He was the master of all and of everything.

Fandor said, “Good day, Your Excellency!” Fantomas replied, “Shut up, rope-maker.” Then he shrugged and turned away.

A Russian prison. In one of the neighborhoods of St. Petersburg. A large, ordinary building. It was flanked by four enormous towers and surrounded by a tall wall. The four towers were connected to one another by long corridors, with double rows of metal doors on each side that opened onto the cells where the prisoners were locked up.

At the end of each corridor, a heavy door. On the ground floor, the door opened onto a large, circular room that occupied the entire tower. The door was locked and the key was kept in the guardroom. The door was under constant guard. 

Inside the room, no furniture, just a table and four chairs, which are removed at night. The window is small and heavily protected, running from floor to ceiling. The room has been built into the ground and is nothing more than a cellar where it is normally so dark that it would be impossible to read a newspaper there, even at noon.

At night, a small, weak electric bulb on the ceiling is turned on, so high above the floor that the light it casts is useless.

No bed. Anyone in the room would have to sleep on the floor.

That room—there are rooms like that in each prison, like a tomb, damp, cold, filled with shadows, where 20 or so men lie together—is called the rope-maker’s room.

What’s a rope-maker?

As Fandor was being carried off by Fantomas’ men, he heard the villain call him a rope-maker twice.

“What does that mean?” the journalist wondered.

However, an epithet, no matter how intriguing it might be, could not hold his attention just them. Jerome Fandor was thinking about something other than Fantomas’ insults. He was already studying a plan for revenge.

Yes, of course, Fantomas had had the last word. He had managed to get rid of Fandor by ordering his arrest. It looked like he had won. Perhaps he had. That would not last, however.

And Jerome Fandor told himself, “I will succeed!”

After all, what more could happen?

Jerome Fandor was picturing the scene already. Of course, Boris Pokroff would accuse him of assassination. They had arrested him with a revolver in hand. Boris Pokroff would claim that Fandor had been trying to kill him.

“Well, well!" said Fandor. “Others, like Juve when he arrives, would tell a different story. I’ll be judged by a court. There are judges in St. Petersburg of course since, according to myth, even Berlin has some. So, I’ll defend myself. And it will be a good fight. Fantomas hasn’t seen the last of me!”

Jerome Fandor focused on these thoughts, insensitive to the blows of the guards brutalizing him as a wagon carried him rapidly to the St. Jean Prison in St. Petersburg. Although the journalist acknowledged that his situation was no walk in the park, he managed to calm his fear. But, as they arrived at the prison, Jerome Fandor experienced an unpleasant surprise.

They were not taking him to the court. As he stepped down from the sleigh, he took part in none of the formalities that usually ensued, everywhere in the world, when a criminal was jailed. Quite the contrary. They dragged him quickly down a corridor. The prison guards ran alongside, asking those who accompanied Fandor in poor Russian, “Who is this”

They replied, “A rope-maker.

Jerome Fandor grew exasperated, “They’re driving me mad with their rope-maker!”

Despite the brutality of the guards, he asked, “What’s a rope-maker?”

The guard looked him up and down and replied, “A bare naked man.”

The man appeared scandalized when Jerome Fandor burst out laughing. “Rope-maker or bare naked man,” he thought. “They’ve given me the most unusual titles.”

His guards, however, did not ease up. They shoved him on vigorously. Once he had walked down the corridor, Fandor arrived at the door to the round room. A key grated.

The guard ordered, “Go in. Hurry up.”

He entered. The door closed behind him.

And Jerome Fandor, eyes blinded by the light, unable to see clearly, tried to get a feel for the surprising room in which he found himself.

There were about 15 young people there, soft faces, looking resigned, who stared at him in curiosity

Jerome Fandor was about to question them when one approached the journalist and asked, “Brother, who are you? Why are you here?”

Hesitant, Fandor replied, “Good grief, for very complicated matters which I don’t understand myself. But you can tell me, what a rope-maker is? What’s a bare-naked person?”

The other person smiled weakly. “Rope-makers are those who are sentenced to death. We call them that because the government decided not to leave handcuffs on the torture victims. They merely tie their hands behind their backs with rope.”

The explanation was sinister indeed. Jerome Fandor grew pale.

“A bare-naked man is someone sentenced to swing from the gallows. By order of the imperial government, in order to save a little money, the clothes are stripped from the hanged man’s body, everything is sold and the money goes into the Treasury.”

The Russian provided these explanations in a mocking tone. Jerome Fandor shivered as he listened.

“Good Lord!” uttered the journalist. “So, I’m sentenced to death!”

Without blinking, the other man said, “Without a doubt. You’ll be hanged just as we all will.”

Then, with the fatalistic soul of a Slav, the Russian man added, “But don’t let that impress you too much. No one grows bored in this room. We have excellent musicians, fine singers to accompany us. Dying on the gallows is unpleasant, of course, but inevitable once you come here. So, there’s no point in worrying about it.”

Jerome Fandor, despite his deep courage, despite his talent for brushing up against death, could not help but shudder. He wanted to live. He wanted to take vengeance. He wanted to defeat Fantomas!



CHAPTER VII - The Man with Ape-like Hands



“Shut up, in the tower! Shut up! If you start singing again, I’ll tell the lieutenant.”

The guard lost his patience. He tapped the butt of his rifle against the thick wall, but his impatience and exhortations were pointless. The tower continued to sing.

The tower was the immense room which housed the unfortunate prisoners who would soon have the pleasure of meeting the emperor’s hangman. Jerome Fandor’s companions, Fandor himself. Executions were an everyday affair in Russia and the prison was full of people sentenced to death. There was no shortage of work for the hangman, who sent five or six people to the other world every morning. And that was just for one prison, not the entire empire.

Yet, those who awaited the death sentence in Russia naturally looked for distractions. And, since was the only leisure activity available to them, they would all sing some popular ditty or even a revolutionary hymn. They made the tower sing with extraordinary music, an unbearable concert that would rise from the sinister round rooms, causing even the bravest, the most indifferent to quiver.

Those who were sentenced to death in Russian prisons formed, as strange as this may seem, a sort of mysterious society, one in which the membership was constantly renewed. They had their habits, their customs, their way of doing things and they all spent the few days between the moment they entered the jail and the fatal instant when the guard came for them, in the same manner.

Jerome Fandor was with these people, taking part in their activities, participating in their anguish, unfortunately, since it was impossible to hold onto the slightest illusion. He was a ropemaker and they were going to hang him one morning or another.

Initially, Jerome Fandor had been chilled to the marrow when he learned of his unfortunate fate.

He had not taken the arrest ordered by Fantomas seriously. He told himself that, even though he was under lock and key, he would find a way to defend himself and no one would prevent him from tearing the mask off that had enabled the abominable criminal mastermind to take the place of Boris Pokroff.

Unfortunately, his illusions did not last long.

Jerome Fandor questioned his companions. They were all political prisoners. They were in the cell reserved for those sentenced to death, waiting for their final minutes, for insignificant crimes, that were considered monstrous by the State. Some had chanted revolutionary slogans in the street; others had insulted the emperor; still others were suspected of “expropriation” a Russian term used to refer to those who stole, not for their own benefit but for a political reason, such as taking vengeance against the tax collector.

Although their crimes differed, the same punishment was reserved for all. The 20 men in the room would all strangle, hanged from the gallows, where they would spin slowly, until their feet stopped twitching.

Jerome Fandor, who felt full of life, who was young, who adored his wife, rebelled at times, filled with rage and despair. Those with him, however, were resigned, calmly fatalistic to the point that they did not seem to understand the horror of their destiny.

“But, Good Lord, they’re going to hang me!” Jerome Fandor had screamed, when he learned why everyone called him a rope-maker.

The Russians around him merely nodded.

“Of course, of course. Unless you want to die by your own hand, if that could be possible.”

And that was typical of all the men waiting for death in the cell. They felt like death’s prisoners. They knew they would not escape. They had lost their hope for life, but they still wanted, with their meager means, to rebel against the law. Jerome would see soon enough. Some of them desired above all to escape the hangman’s death. They preferred to kill themselves!

Their greatest wish was to obtain a knife, to stab themselves in the heart, to latch onto some virulent poison that would send them into the other world, all to prevent the hangman from doing his job.

Jerome Fandor realized all this during the first hours of his captivity.

Death was, in fact, the topic of all their conversations. The men overwhelmed him with their thoughtfulness, they provided information amicably. This brought a sad smile to his lips.

“Well,” thought Fandor, “So I’m the man of the hour!”

It was true that all of the occupants of the lower room were always thrilled when a new prisoner arrived. It broke up the monotony of their day.

Jerome Fandor thought he was living in a nightmare at that very moment. It seemed impossible that his adventures could be real. Was it true that all of those surrounding him, those Russians, with their thoughtful expressions, those ardent revolutionaries who dreamed of a society in which everyone would be happy, those 17 and 18-year old children, were really sentenced to death?

And Jerome Fandor, who had been on the point of giving in to the horror, felt ashamed by his emotions when he noticed how those around him remained absolutely, rigorously calm, the calm of those who knew that they were irrevocably in the hands of fate.

The first night, however, was truly horrific for Fandor. He saw the condemned men lie down next to one another on the ground and, as they closed their eyes, they exchanged joyful good nights.

“Sleep tight," they said.

No one could be certain that the hangman would not come in a few hours to take them

Jerome Fandor learned that there was no regular procedure. Some had been waiting for the fateful moment for over 50 days; others were hanged at the end of their first week of incarceration. It all depended on the paperwork, an administrative quagmire no one understood.

“Plus!" added the Russian who had been explaining things to Fandor. “There’s really no point in thinking about it since there’s nothing you can do to change it!" said, maintaining that supreme logic, invoking a crazy fatalism, a horrific and incomprehensible resignation.

Jerome Fandor lay down like the others and thought.

His neighbor looked at him and said, “You’re looking thoughtful. You must not give in to bad thoughts. You have to forget everything, to sing...”

And the Russian hummed a few bars of a popular song. The entire tower started to shriek.

That was their habit. When one of the convicted men shivered, as the frightening vision of the gallows rose before his eyes, the others forced him to sing. That would always change his mind, at least that’s what they all claimed, and perhaps they were right.

Lying on the ground, sleep unattainable, Jerome Fandor was unable to calm down. After a moment of understandable defeat, he felt overwhelmed with a wild rage. At the very moment that he had thought he’d defeated Fantomas, the criminal mastermind had invented a radically new strategy.

“I’m going to be hanged,” Fandor said.

And he preferred to think about that, about his painful death, than about his poor Helene who was all alone in St. Petersburg, exposed to the monstrous cruelty of the man who had passed as her father.

The night seemed interminable to Fandor. At about 11 pm, a feverish agitation overtook the man next to him. The convicts who had seemed to be sleeping up to that point were moving about. Some rushed, at the slightest sound, to the door of their cell, and placed their ears against the openings. What were they so eager to listen to?

Were the noises they heard, in the distance, those that usually accompanied the preparations for an execution? Were those footsteps that approached, those of the hangman looking for his prey?

When silence returned, Fandor noticed jagged breathing, quiet moans. The candidates for death included poor wretches who had pleasant dreams and others whose nightmares were filled with torture.

The next morning, Jerome Fandor was still when he awoke. He had barely closed his eyes all night, going over and over the circumstances of his arrest in his mind.

“Of course!" he thought. “Since they’ve already placed me in with the men who are sentenced to death, since they already consider me a rope-maker, there is no chance that I will be brought before a court. Russia is an arbitrary country. Pokroff, or rather Fantomas, now has the authority of the police and must have arranged for my execution. Fantomas will not go easy on me. He must be in a rush to get rid of me. My time will come soon.”

Yet the next morning held a surprise for the journalist. The guards came to the cell for him and took him to see three individuals in a small room. One of them was an enormous man. He appeared to be the leader. To his right sat a very old individual, humble and respectful. In a corner of the room, Fandor saw the back of a very strange man, oddly thin and twisted. He kept his face turned carefully toward the wall, but he held his hands, with enormous, contorted, incredibly hairy fingers, like those of an ape, in clear view, clasped behind his back.

“What the devil does this mean?” Fandor wondered. “Are these men judges? Are they going to interrogate me? Have I had the good fortune of being referred to a regular court?”

He was, in fact, appearing before a court. The tribunal was meeting in keeping with Russian law, but it was nothing like ordinary courts, the courts in other, more civilized countries.

Fandor was asked no questions. When he attempted to speak, he was ordered to remain silent.

The large man, probably a judge merely read a document, reading it so quickly, pronouncing the words so poorly that the entire text became unintelligible. Yet, Jerome Fandor guessed at the meaning. He was being read his sentence. He understood one thing only, that he had been convicted of attempted murder and would be hanged by the neck until dead.

The enormous man was completely indifferent as he read. His neighbor, the small old man, a clerk, or so Fandor thought, seemed to be occupied with something else, carefully cleaning his nails. The man with the ape-like hands did not move.

When he understood, Jerome Fandor stood straighter and shouted, “I’m French, I demand a meeting with my ambassador!”

But his interruption produced no effect. No one listened to him and five minutes later, Fandor was taken back to his cell. He no longer had any illusions. The parody of a hearing had been carried out and he was truly sentenced to death. There was no hope.

“Well,” thought Jerome Fandor. “Since I have to die, I must accept my fate. And if Fantomas is curious enough to ask about my final moments, I don’t want him to hear that I lost heart.”

And that day, Jerome Fandor was the most cheerful of all the dying men. He understood the true secret behind their indifference. They were political prisoners, revolutionaries. Many of them must have been nihilists. They faced death bravely. Obviously, they had no desire to tremble before the authorities they refused to accept. Jerome Fandor grew calm after accepting his fate.

“They did say,” he grumbled, “That I would come to a bad end. I was sentenced to the garrote in Spain. Here, I’ll be going to the gallows. That’s not quite as good. After all, with the garrote you sit, but you stand for the gallows.”

It was grave humor. But in the worst of moments, the most abominable situations, Fandor had the energy he needed to react, to find a word, a witticism, to use typical French irony to hide his deepest feelings.

The fatalism of the men around him took over. It was obvious that his fate was set in stone. There was no point in trying to escape. There was nothing he could do to stay alive. He might as well face death bravely and look it in face without fear.

The days dragged on, monotonous. The prisoners were strangely calm, subdued by destiny. They talked politics, religion and philosophy. Some played cards. Others sang tirelessly. When one of the men turned inward, seeming to want to be alone, the others instinctively drew closer to him, forcing him to sing, trying to cheer him up. The idea of death was everywhere, weighing down on all of the men, but not a single one spoke of it.

One morning, however, emotion swept over the room.

“Adieu, adieu..?’ The cry rang out through the cell. Jerome Fandor, who was still sleeping, pale dawn barely breaking, sat up suddenly.

“What is it?” he called out.

They told him.

“The escort is at the door. They’ve come for one of us.”

“Who?” asked Fandor.

The others shrugged.

“Impossible to know. But it can’t be you. You haven’t been a rope-maker long enough.”

Just then the door opened. Jerome Fandor, who was standing in the middle of the room, arms crossed, felt his heart pound when he saw the uniforms.

The large corridor that led to the lower room was crowded with people. First the prison guards, then the Cossacks followed by the officers and then by the authorities, laden with furs and braided hats, faces pale, drawn with the emotion that overcomes everyone when they go to get a sleeping and take him to his death.

“Damn!” Fandor thought. “Look at all those people.”

His mind was clear and lucid at that moment. Jerome Fandor experienced a strange feeling, thinking, “It’s not my turn today. But tomorrow it will be. I have to get used to the performance so I can play my role properly.”

And he repeated that thought to himself over and over, since there are times when one’s mind is overwhelmed with a single concern, moments of supreme anguish, when insignificant details suddenly seem colossal.

And, a moment later, a moment that lasted a second but seemed longer than a century, Jerome Fandor saw two prison guards approach, protected by four Cossacks with their sabers drawn. And in his confused mind, the death penalty, the supreme penalty on which all modern societies are based, suddenly seemed vile and grotesque to him.

How could people come, in the middle of the night, to kill another! They hid in the shadows, they were protected by soldiers! Then, when they had given free rein to their cowardice, they said, “In the name of the Tsar...” and they carried their victim off, bound, to assassinate him in the name of the law!

“The death penalty... infamy,” thought Jerome Fandor. “A barbaric remnant of past times, something unworthy in our civilized period, rejected by philosophy, refused by the human heart. Obviously, if I were not sentenced to death myself, I’d write a book about this one day!”

Jerome Fandor was thinking incredibly quickly at that moment. One idea chased after another in his mind, as if wound on a gigantic reel. Then suddenly he stopped thinking.

The guards walked over to him and placed their hands on his shoulders.

“Come!” they ordered.

Fandor’s heart stopped for a second. They were coming for him? He was the one being executed that morning? Then, in the extraordinary throes of rebellion, he threw himself to the side. Would a fight break out? Would he try to escape? Jerome Fandor abruptly fell silent. Calm swept over him. There was no point fighting... There was no honor in resistance. If it was his fate to be hanged until dead, then hanged he would be. He was ready!

He recognized those around him. The large man shivering was the judge. The bailiff blowing in his hands to warm them was the old man he had seen before. Without a doubt, he had completed his manicure. Behind him came the pope. An elderly man who walked slowly, clasping the doctor’s arm, with the look of an imbecile, asking him for information about liver problems.

“Come!” the guards said again.

And Jerome Fandor went with them docilely.

The prison corridor was jammed with soldiers. As he walked past them, they raised their weapons.

“They are so very afraid!" Fandor thought.

It all seemed the more grotesque, to him, since he was not dangerous, he was unable to do anything; he was alone against everyone, and they were taking him to his death like a lamb to the slaughter.

When they reached the office, Fandor thought, “The longest part is over. In ten minutes, at most, it will be done...”

He was getting used to the gloomy idea. As he attempted to think things through, he realized that he was more overwhelmed than frightened. He felt as if he had been struck on the head with a hammer. His thoughts were muddled.

“This feels strange!" Fandor told himself, standing straight, refusing the help of a guard, walking all alone.

At the office, the assistants continued to talk and Jerome Fandor realized that everyone seemed uncomfortable. They were embarrassed to be there. None of them would have wanted to relinquish their place.

All eyes were on Jerome Fandor. He felt them staring at him, examining him and he wanted to shout, “So, there’s something amusing about a man who is going to die?”

But he said nothing. They were taking care of him. Someone, the clerk, read a long sentence.

“By the authority of His Imperial Majesty...” and since he was still cold, he stopped to blow on his hands.

Jerome heard nothing of his sentence. His mind was elsewhere. Helene... Juve... the two beings he loved most in the world. Their memories haunted him. He would never see them again! He would never again enjoy Juve’s cordial and abrupt handshake. He would never lose himself in Helene’s lips again.

“Well!” thought Fandor. “I should stop thinking about them. That will just make me feel emotional and I don’t want that!”

And events were raced on.

“Do you have anything to say?” asked the pope.

Fandor stared at him and said, “A cigarette.”

He smiled since everyone was visibly pleased that he had expressed a wish. The people there were certainly not his enemies. They were simply doing their duty. Although they all felt the horror of their situation, they truly wished to execute him since not doing so would have started a revolution.

Twenty cigarette cases appeared. A guard took one out and placed it between Fandor’s lips as they attached his hands behind his back.

“A match!” demanded the journalist.

As the doctor lit his cigarette with a poker, Fandor focused on the grotesque details. At that very moment, he heard the physician talking with the substitute, “Tobacco,” he declared, “Is very bad for one’s health.”

“Fine,” thought Jerome Fandor. “One less thing I’ll have to worry about.”

“Come now,” the guards said. “Outside with you.”

Jerome Fandor found it hard to walk. He was wearing irons. The chain was heavy, rubbing against his ankles. Yet he did not want help. He made an effort and followed the guards. Behind him, all conversation stopped and the audience rushed to follow, not wanting to miss a single detail.

Jerome Fandor shivered. They led him into the prison courtyard. It was terribly cold and the snow whirled about.

“Surely, I'll catch my death of cold,” Fandor joked out loud.

But no one smiled.

Death was there, listening like the others, and his presence made them all fall silent from fear.

“The blacksmith?” a voice orders.

‘Yes, Your Honor.’

At the order of the prison warden, one of the guards walked away. Then he came back followed by two people. One was the blacksmith. Jerome Fandor paid him little attention. The other made him shiver.

He was a small creature, thin, deformed, legs twisted, head bony, neck stretched by a goiter. Jerome Fandor recognized him immediately. He was the man who had turned his back during his appearance before the extraordinary tribunal.

Why had he been looking at the wall like that? Fandor guessed the reason easily enough. Furthermore, he was dressed strangely. He wore a large red shift tucked in peasant’s pants and a black cloth mask covered his face. Certainly, the man did not want to be seen.

Jerome guessed the truth, “That’s the hangman!”

Then he repeated, “That’s my hangman!”

However, the blacksmith was working about Fandor. He placed the chain that bound his Fandor’s ankles on a block. The blacksmith’s hammer flew through the air tossing shards of steel about. He rained blows down, the links fell and the chain broke.

“Too bad!" thought Fandor, stretching. “It looks like freedom, but it’s really death.”

And it was.

Once the chain had been broken, the procession set out again. They left the first courtyard and entered a second. Fandor, his arms and legs free, walked proudly, without shaking, without hesitating.

When he entered the second courtyard, the journalist looked up. There was still a crowd, a great many people were waiting for him, important personalities, choice guests, an entire audience that had had to scheme their way into the prison.

But Fandor saw no one. He saw only one thing, standing in the middle of the courtyard, the gallows. After examining the courtyard, he turned his head. A few steps away, a loud racket rose from a hole that four or five men were digging. The cold was so intense that their spades made the dirt sing.

“My grave,” Fandor guessed.

At that moment, the official went over to the workers and asked, “Is it the legal depth?”

They indicated that it was and events proceeded.

Fandor suddenly noticed that everyone had stepped away, leaving him all alone. He stood still, waiting.

“Juve... Helene...” he thought.

Yet, one man had stayed next to the journalist, the man with the ape-like hands. He seemed perfectly resigned. He knew full well what he had to do and he did it without rushing, without hesitating, performing usual task that was not of much interest, standing next to a large, empty crate. He bent down and tore off the cover. The box appeared to grow larger. It contained the infinity of the tomb, the unknown void.

“Not much of a coffin,” Fandor smiled.

The journalist was still in control of himself.

He felt no fear. From time to time, barely perceptible, his shivered with rage at the thought of this ignominious death, a superb victory for Fantomas.

From the depth of the box, the hangman pulled out a large white sheet. As he unfolded it slowly, it rustled.

“What’s that?” Fandor asked, then answered his own question. “My shroud!”

Second by second, action by action, Fandor noted the details of his death. Yet, the hangman did not rush. He unfolded another white bag, a smaller one, which he simply took from his pocket. And, a few seconds later, he walked over to Fandor and placed the bag over the journalist’s head. The journalist remained patient as the poorly made bag slipped awkwardly over his face.

Yet Jerome Fandor continued to think. At that very moment, the intrepid young man felt an irresistible desire to tell a joke.

“I must look like a ghost, a white monk. They’ve put the bag over my head to avoid seeing the grimace I’m about to make.”

The hangman pushed him by the shoulders.

“Come, come, come.”

And Jerome was filled with disgust as he felt the ape-like hands take his arm. He took a few steps.

“Farther back,” shouted the hangman. The gallows are behind you.

Docilely, Fandor stepped back. A few seconds passed. Finally, he felt a rope winding around his neck.

“This is it,” the young man decided.

Yet the hangman continued to fidget around him.

“What can he possibly be doing?” Fandor wondered. “Hurry up, hangman, how long does it take to tie a noose?”

The other man merely said, “Pull!”

The workers standing behind the gallows pulled on their end of the rope, which tightened suddenly, and Jerome Fandor felt himself pulled up from the ground.

A few seconds later, his body swayed in the void...



CHAPTER VIII - Interrogation



Jerome Fandor’s body swayed ominously in the air. Hanging from the crossbar of the gallows, it looked like a scarecrow. The shroud fell below his feet; the bag covered his face, hiding the poor man’s grimace.

No one said anything. They could barely make out the horrible death that must have been taking place under cover of the shroud. The swinging feet seemed to claw at the air, looking for something to grasp. There was very little wind and the body spun only a little. No convulsions. Quickly, it stopped moving. The man had to be dead.

The doctor approached. He held a gold watch in his hand and he watched the hands turn.

“Wait,” he ordered. “We have to wait ten minutes after the hanging.”

That was the law. The law that governs executions went into the most macabre detail. People who had been hanged had to remain on the gallows for ten minutes. Those ten minutes seemed like centuries to witnesses, the privileged who had maneuvered to be allowed to watch the execution.

No one moved. They all appeared to be dumbfounded. For a second, death reigned over everyone. The spectacle of the hanging man was horrific, gloomy and grotesque. The poor body swinging in the breeze seemed so pitiful that no one dared to break the silence.

The least courageous and the most nervous, feeling their legs about to give way beneath them, allowed themselves to fall back against a large pile of wood that had been stacked some distance away. The others, standing, remained there, arms dangling, eyes staring, watching the body swing like a white rag at the end of the rope.

At that moment, all of the workers climbed out of the pit. They had been told that they were free to go, that they were no longer needed, but they stayed. The blacksmith remained as well. That was a curious thing. Everyone was shivering, yet they all remained in place, immobile, frozen in astonishment, completely incapable of moving.

The doctor watched the hands on his watch. After a moment, he declared, “The ten minutes are up.”

Then he did his job. He walked over to the hanged man. He grasped the feet under the shroud and made sure they were not moving. Quickly, he brushed his ear against the shroud. The man was so obviously dead that his inspection was most cursory.

“Fine,” he said. “Do your duty, hangman!”

The man with the ape-like hands, the man who wore a black cloth mask over his face to make sure that no one recognized him, so that no one, in the future, could be tempted to take the revenge that his horrible traded merited, the hangman walked quickly.

He took a saber from an unsuspecting Cossack and pulled it from its sheath. The blade shone for a moment in the air. The hangman swung it, cutting right through the rope and Fandor’s body fell heavily to the ground. In keeping with the law, the official declared, “The body belongs to you hangman. You’re free to take the clothing...”

The hangman nodded. He grabbed the body by the shoulders and without removing the shroud, he dragged it over to the pit and abruptly shoved it in. The spectators heard the body land. Then the hangman picked up a shovel and slowly started to fill the grave.

Just then, the spectators seemed to wake up, as if from long nightmare, shaking off their immobility one after another. Time seemed to have passed horribly slowly. But, finally, the man was dead and the hangman was throwing dirt on the body. It was over. The poor wretch was dead and buried and they could go, leave the horror of this courtyard behind, run from the frightful vision, forget the work of justice.

They were already exchanging their goodbyes. And since it was horrifically cold, they rushed to return to the warmth of the furs left behind in the sleighs at the prison doors. It would be good to go back home, as well. Yet, the warm tea in the samovar would have a bitter taste.

Within fifteen minutes, all of the spectators had left.

After that, close to the gallows, which still appeared new, looking as if he were waiting to be given other men to kill, the hangman continued his work. He shoveled large amounts of dirt into the pit and given the speed with which he worked it would not take him long to finish.

Soon, in the prison courtyard, people would see nothing more than a small heap in the place of the pit, then, with the next storm, the snow would level everything and freeze it, leaving no trace of the frightful drama.

Jerome Fandor, dead, would not even be given the honor of a tomb where his loved ones could go and kneel. The brave man, thrown into a hole, would rot without the homage of a memory, a tear, a prayer...

That same day, in one of the outlying houses in St. Petersburg. In a cold room, with poor walls, and no ornament, a room where light barely entered through a narrow spy hole meagerly carved in the stone walls and where even less air penetrated, the low door was sealed. The persistent odor of smoke reigned in the shanty. There was an old stove that always smoked a little. Throughout the winter, black soot escaped through at an elbow in the chimney. It spread over everything and was never cleaned. It fell in a thick, soft blanket and appeared to be part of the atmosphere.

In that room, however, darkened with smoke, in that room where twilight barely penetrated, a human figure came and went. It looked like a ghost with an extraordinary shape. But, a closer look revealed that it was not a ghost but a woman, an old woman, wrapped in a black mantle from head to foot, walking about barefoot, wearing a large bonnet tied with ribbons, black as well, that looked like the fluttering wings of a dark night bird.

The old woman walked from the stove, where the open door cast a red light, to the back of a sort of alcove hollowed into the wall, which contained a bed. The old woman bent over the bed, mumbled something that seemed to make no sense. “He’ll make it or he’ll die. The rum is strong... I think they’ll come this evening, moreover... He’s young and strong. Yes, there he is, opening his eyes.”

In the poor room, the silvery tinkle of a spoon stirring a drink, rang out. The scent of rum mingled with the odor of the soot.

The old woman grumbled, “Drink, son, drink.

It’s just what the doctor ordered.”

After a moment, a voice, a resonant voice, warm but still weak, still trembling, asked, “Where am I mother?”

“In my home. Safe.”

“Who are you?”

“Marfa Berena. Vassili’s mother.”

The weak voice said, “ Vassili’s mother. But who is Vassili?”

“You'll find out later. Sleep now.”

Silence reigned for a moment. As the old woman came back from the stove and approached the alcove, the feeble voice asked again, “Where am I? Prisoner? Free?”

“You’re alive,” replied the old woman.

In the alcove, plunged into total darkness, something moved slowly. An unknown shape. A white ghost. A long mass, wrapped in the folds a rough fabric. Nothing else could be seen.

The old woman clasped her hands and said, “Good grief I What are you doing? Sleep!”

“No, mother, I’m getting up.”

“Sleep son. You have to rest.”

The voice, although weak, grew clearer, “Dammit! I’m fine.”

The old woman rushed over. One moment, the white shape shook, then the fabric was pulled off. What was this mystery and how could it be possible?

A dead man got up from the bed in the alcove. And it was a dead man, since Jerome Fandor was dead, he had been hanged, he had been buried, with the dirt already weighing down on his chest. Yet, here he was, and he had to be alive, since dead men don’t usually return from the grave.

Old Marfa watched without fear as this extraordinary apparition got up from the bed.

She begged, "My son, believe me. Stay in bed. You’ll be better off there than elsewhere.”

Jerome Fandor or the shadow of Jerome Fandor protested, “Mother, I can’t stay still. It’s not in my nature.”

“Well then, come.”

“Where?”

“I have orders.”

The old woman got up. She took the extraordinary creature in the white shroud by the hand and guided him to a small door, black with soot, which she opened with difficulty.

“Come,” repeated Marfa Berena.

He followed her. They both walked down a dark staircase, the brick walls sweating.

A few minutes later, Marfa Berena opened the door, very thick, very solid, to a large cellar.

“Go in,” she said.

The man went in and asked, “Are you going to leave me here?”

“I have orders.”

Obviously, Marfa did not want to give anything away, did not dare give the man questioning her the information he wanted, since she closed the door abruptly.

But what was this mystery?

The man who had just entered the cellar, the man who looked like Jerome Fandor, stayed there alone, and sat down on a crate. He placed his elbows on his knees and rested his head on his hands. He seemed most surprised and very weary.

“All right now,” he murmured. “Where am I?”

He barked a laugh and added, “I don’t know if I’m dead or alive, if I’m on the earth or down in hell...”

The man was, in fact, Jerome Fandor. But wasn’t Fandor supposed to be dead? The man wondered. The adventure that he had been caught up in was so fantastic, so impossible to understand, so unexpected that he did not know what to believe. That left room for doubting, hesitating, waiting.

His mind overwhelmed, he found it difficult to understand what his senses showed him. He remembered the tragic execution of that morning. The chain of his memories continued until the moment when the hangman had placed the fatal noose around his neck.

“Pull!” the man had shouted. The rope tightened. Fandor felt as if he had been pulled into the air. But what had happened next?

Marshalling all of his memories, striving to find a fleeting truth, Jerome Fandor gradually reconstructed what had to have happened. Yes, that was it. As the rope tightened, as he felt himself being pulled into the air. As the hangman pushed his feet in order to finish him off faster, Fandor recalled that he had experienced an extraordinary surprise.

Of course, he felt bruised, grazed, wounded by the terrible hanging. Yet, he breathed freely. Nothing blocked his throat. The air continued to flow into his chest. Nothing hampered his lungs.

Everything Jerome Fandor felt, was a suffering like a wound, like a very hard object that pressed under his chin, at the back of his neck, around his face. At that moment, in a flash of though, Jerome sent a final kiss to Helene, saying, “I’m going to die, but Juve will avenge me some day.”

Yes, he was not suffering. Unquestionably, he had been hanged. His body floated in the air. His feet, which kicked against the air despite himself, could find no foothold. Yet, he continued to live. He was in perfect control of himself and that surprised him.

“What’s going on? What' s going on?”

Fandor quickly guessed. It was unlikely, yet quite simple. The shroud that the hangman had placed on him, the cloth shroud that wrapped around him like a bag, contained a steel frame, a frame Fandor could feel around his neck. It was like an infinitely resistant piece of armor that fit like a detachable collar.

What was it used for? Initially, Jerome Fandor thought this was some plot hatched by Juve or perhaps even some police officer who wanted to save him. The iron necklace he wore did, in fact, prevent the noose from doing its job. And Jerome Fandor owed his very life to that iron necklace. The rope tightened, but not around him since the rigid armor did not give way under its pressure.

A moment passed and Jerome Fandor felt hope wildly rising. If they had prevented him, even against his will, from being hanged by the hangman’s noose, then obviously someone was watching over him, someone who could save him.

Jerome Fandor had no doubts. And, given his usual presence of mind, he found the strength to resist the desire to shout. He had enough selfcontrol to remain absolutely silent.

“They'll cut me down, but let’s hope they do it quickly,” he thought. “This is unbearable.”

The unfortunate man’s situation was, in fact quite terrible. Although the rope was not strangling him, it was painful. The iron necklace held the journalist, resting on his chin and the back of his neck. His entire weight was supported by his neck. He could feel his spinal column stretching and felt as if it would break at any moment.

Despite himself, he beat at the air with his feet. People being hanged usually did. No one watching the hanging would have the least bit surprised. It was a conscious movement, but they all considered it a reflex. Moreover, at that point Jerome Fandor was not in any condition to control the disorderly movements of his limbs. Blood raced to his head, his heart pounded and he was on the point of losing consciousness.

The last thing he heard clearly was the doctor saying, “We have to wait ten minutes.”

“I’m lost,” thought Fandor, and he fainted.

A few moments later, the unfortunate victim felt himself fall, painfully, not once but twice, once when they cut the rope and then when the hangman threw him into the pit.

It was all so painful, so unexpected that Jerome Fandor fainted again. That, at least, meant that he did not feel the shovelfuls of dirt thrown on his face. He did not see the hangman, the man with the ape-like hands fill the pit. Jerome Fandor was not even aware that, once the authorities had all departed, the same hangman worked even faster, removing the dirt he was supposed to be shoveling into the pit, dragging the so-called dead man out of the pit and over to a sleigh where he hid him.

Jerome Fandor woke up at Marfa Berena’s place He did not know the woman. He did not understand how he had arrived at her place. He did not understand why he had been rescued. Yet, there was one thing he did realize. He was alive, fresh air entered his lungs and he was free to talk and walk

Jerome Fandor, his strength gradually returning, was once again as energetic and valiant as ever and could not stay down for long. He paced furiously back and forth in the cell where he had been locked. And his curiosity was piqued.

“Why did they save me?” he thought. “Who saved me? Where am I?”

And, he came up with all kinds of crazy stories.

“They must have caught Boris Pokroff,” he said to himself. “They figured out that he was Fantomas and they overturned my sentence... I'm certainly in the hands of the police and they will come to question me. They’ll release me...”

As he strode about, however, he noticed that next to him, in a neighboring cellar, since he was certainly in a cellar, there was someone else, pacing just as he was.

Who could that be? Another prisoner, no doubt. Perhaps another of Fantomas’ victims? And Jerome Fandor felt like hitting his head against the wall.

“My neighbors, who must be prisoners, might be able to give me some information. I could find out from them where I am and who that Marfa Berena is and if they’ll hang me again or let me free.”

Juve’s friend, however, did not have long to think. The door to his cell opened suddenly and

Jerome Fandor spun around, filled once again with fear, and stared at the man who came in.

He was a large man, strangely dressed, in a manner that inspired terror. He wore a large black coat, like those worn by French priests, collar reaching to his chin, along with a large, soft hat that hid his eyes. His face was covered by a black mask.

Who was this man? What business did he have with the dead man who had escaped the gallows?

Jerome Fandor waited impatiently for the man to speak. Yet, the newcomer did not appear rushed. He proceeded slowly to close the door. And, without glancing at Fandor, he headed toward the back of the cellar. There was a cask there. He used it as a desk, placing a series of papers on it. Then and only then, did he decide to speak.

In a gentle voice, he said, “My friend, I know you don’t know how you managed to come here. And, in any case, that’s not important. All you need to know is that, if I decide to, I can save you, free you, and that, also if I want to, I can send you back to the gallows and hang you again.

Jerome Fandor said nothing.

He was most surprised, wondering where this was all headed and if he had not been deluded when he thought he was actually about to be saved.

The man, however, continued, “You will answer me honestly. Your fate depends on that. We know a great many things, but not everything...”

Jerome Fandor decided to speak up, “I will answer you honestly,” he said. “Because I don’t ever lie. Yet, I will admit that I don’t know everything myself. If you want to know, for example, how I was saved from the gallows, I have to admit I have no idea. I thought I would die this morning and I’m as surprised as anyone to see that I’m still alive.”

As he spoke Jerome Fandor was obviously telling the truth. He had no idea about the mysterious manner in which he had been rescued. He suspected that the hangman had carried off his body, or rather his alleged body, but he did not know that for a fact. If he had known, however, he would never have betrayed the man.

What actually happened?

At that point, the journalist had a glimmering of the truth. Someone must have wanted him alive and they must have paid the hangman to arrange that. He had not been strangled, although things could have ended badly.

“When they freed me,” Fandor thought, “They must have noticed that I wasn’t dead. Those who carried me off, deprived of all feeling, must have been arrested. The man in front of me is a judge and the best I can hope for is to convince him that I am perfectly innocent.”

That would be quite some job, though.

Jerome Fandor thought it was highly likely that he would be sentence to death again. But, the man standing before him did not give him much time to think. He smiled when he heard Fandor state that he had no idea how he had been taken from death. Then his expression grew serious again and, in a rough voice he said, “Your name is Jerome Fandor. Is that true?”

“Yes,” replied Fandor.

“You came to Russian on police business. Is that true?”

“Yes”

“And you went to Boris Pokroff’s house on police business?”

“Yes,” Fandor said again, starting to feel somewhat reassured.

The interrogation, in fact was going well. It seemed that the judge knew about his case. At least, he knew his identity and was not unaware of the reasons he came to Russia. Without a doubt, he would believe Fandor, in a few minutes, when He told him that Boris Pokroff was actually Fantomas. Yet, a few seconds later, Fandor started to worry once again, as the voice of the Russian who was interrogating him grew more and more serious.

He said, “Jerome Fandor, you were aware of the functions performed by Boris Pokroff? You knew, no doubt, that he worked as the chief of police?”

Jerome Fandor nodded.

“So, you realized how important this individual was?”

Jerome Fandor smiled.

“I knew perfectly well. All the more so since...”

“Wait!” interrupted the judge.

The man seemed to collect himself. He was shivering visibly, as he continued to question Jerome Fandor.

“Tell me,” he said. “You can speak later, but first I want you to answer all of my questions accurately... Tell me, is it true that you were hired

to work as a servant for Boris Pokroff?”

Jerome Fandor did not hesitate. Did he need to hide the truth? Of course not. Moreover, it was not in his nature to do so.

“That’s true,” he admitted.

“So, you clearly intended to get close to the man?”

“Yes,” Fandor said again. “But I did so because...”

“Wait!” said the judge.

Jerome Fandor was starting to lose his patience. He was burning to tell the man that Boris Pokroff was Fantomas.

The judge continued, “Is it true that you intended to kill Boris Pokroff?”

Fandor stood taller. He crossed his arms over his chest and stared at the other man with shining eyes.

“Sir, you insult me! I’m not an assassin. I’m not even an executioner. I did not want to kill Boris Pokroff. I wanted to unmask the man. I was doing the work of justice because...”

Jerome Fandor was about to continue speaking. He stopped suddenly because the judge stood up abruptly.

Furious, the man asked, “You swear on your honor that you did not intend to kill Pokroff?”

“I do!” said Fandor. “He was...”

“You did not go into his service in order to assassinate him?”

“Not at all. I wanted to prove that..?

“So, you had no intention to kill the chief of the secret police.”

“Not at all," Jerome Fandor repeated. “I intended to prove that Pokroff is Fan...”

“Wretch!” interrupted the judge. “We saved you. So, we were mistaken? You’re not a nihilist?”

“Of course not,” replied Fandor.

Then something strange happened. The man questioning him suddenly reeled back.

“Oh! Holy Virgin!” he shrieked. “He’s not a nihilist. He said so.! He boasts of it!”

Jerome Fandor had not yet recovered from the legitimate surprise that this exclamation caused when two vigorous hands grabbed him.

Assuredly, another individual had entered the cellar without him noticing. Upon a sign from the judge, this man threw himself at Fandor, who could do nothing at all, as he was bound hand and foot and gagged.

But what did all this mean?



CHAPTER IX - The Revolutionary Tribunal



Jerome did not understand a thing. Yet, precisely as a result of his extraordinary bravery and unshakeable nerve, the young man was much less worried about the series of adventures he seemed destined to get involved in without ever truly being able to unmask the truth.

Yet, the events of the past two hours had surprised him. If Jerome Fandor raged, he truly did have to be brave so that this bad temper would not simply transform into incredible fear.

At the very moment that Jerome Fandor was energetically denying the nihilist's accusation, an accusation he did not merit, since he simply was not a nihilist, he felt himself grabbed from behind then quickly gagged and bound so that he was completely incapable of fighting.

“Well, what does this mean?” the journalist wondered. “Exactly what is going on here? I don’t think I’ll ever understand. So far, I’ve been in prison, with people who were nihilists and who had been imprisoned for that and now people are jumping on me specifically because I’m not a nihilist...”

It took an extraordinary amount of courage, at that moment, for Jerome Fandor to think that clearly. In fact, his current situation was about as inappropriate for rational thought as it could be for the excellent reason that blows were raining down upon him and he ran the risk of having his skull bashed in at any moment.

“Gently, my friends, gently!”

But his protests fell on deaf ears.

Jerome Fandor did not utter another word. His was on the point of fainting when suddenly a loud voice rang out, “Don’t kill him. You must not kill him! First, he has to be tried!”

As if by magic, the blows stopped. Yet, for all that, his situation had not improved. Although they were no longer hitting him, they had tightened his bonds and he could feel the thick rope digging into his skin.

A few seconds later, Fandor felt himself grabbed by the feet and shoulders. Obviously, they were carrying him. But where were they taking him? The journalist did not have the slightest idea. Yet, the trip was not long. All too soon, Jerome Fandor was thrown roughly to the ground, skinning his face.

He groaned and muttered, “Trials, trials! Since this morning people just keep dropping me. I’m starting to get tired of these clowns. If this keeps up, I’ll make a complaint...”

Jerome Fandor, to be perfectly truthful, was attempting to make a joke. He belonged to that race of brave men who, when danger presses in, know how to face it with a smile on their lips. He still did not really understand exactly what was happening to him, why they had saved him and how, after tearing him out of death’s arms, they were now after him. One thing, however, was certain; the people who held him prisoner wished him no good. Obviously, they would not hesitate to kill him within a few minutes.

“They said they were going to judge me,” Fandor thought. “Damn! I’m starting to get an idea about trials in this primitive country. They are most certainly quick and not terribly impartial.”

Lying on the ground, Jerome Fandor struggled and managed to turn around. As soon as he lay on his side, he started to grimace under his blindfold with such perseverance, such wild energy, that he managed to free his eyes.

“Damn,” he grumbled.” I may be free to see but that gets me nowhere. I'm completely in the dark.”

He was in the dark, in fact, in absolute blackness. Without a doubt, he had been pitched into some sort of windowless cubbyhole. Would he be there long? Would they come quickly to release him from this horror?

“I would prefer it if they rushed,” Fandor decided.

But he avoided making any other wishes. He was so powerless to try anything, to change his situation, that making wishes would have served no purpose.

“Let's look at things as they are and wait!” he grumbled.

Yet waiting seemed profoundly horrible, particularly if he were to die that evening.

And the unfortunate man sighed. At that moment, despite himself, he pictured Helene and the thought of that young woman, his beloved, waiting for him hurt him.

Helene! Helene! She was so far away. She must be worried. She must be surprised by his attitude. Oh, without a doubt, time would pass before she would learn, if she ever did, what had happened to the man she loved more than anything and who had not loved her as he should have, as she deserved.

Jerome Fandor made a colossal effort to control his mind. He chased the tender image of Helene from his mind.

“Let’s get ready!" he thought. “Ready to appear before the judges.”

Hours passed, endless, and monotonous. Moreover, remaining still was starting to be quite painful. They had not untied his bonds and they were eating into his flesh.

Jerome Fandor thought, “These Russians are wretches. If Juve ever manages to arrest Fantomas in this god-forsaken country, he will most likely get into trouble trying to keep them from torturing his prisoner!”

Despite himself, Fandor smiled. The idea of Juve having to defend Fantomas against those that arrested him, was amusing. Yet, despite the effort that the journalist made to not let his thoughts weigh over his fate, he was starting to wonder if he had not been sentenced to die of hunger in the horrible cell where he found himself, when voices rang out. And sure enough, men were approaching his cell. Soon, the door grated.

“Ah!” thought Fandor, shrugging. “Is this some new torture? Or has the moment of justice arrived? But what does it matter after all. Although I have no idea what’s going on, I’m sure I’m already lost!"

Those who arrived, however, lifted Jerome Fandor without causing him too much harm. The journalist could not see their faces, since they all avoided looking in his direction.

“It’s curious," He thought. “But these people seem to be afraid of being recognized. Since they are police officers, they shouldn’t be so timorous. They’re just doing their duty and..."

Jerome Fandor stopped his monologue just then. Those carrying him had just entered a large, plain room. It was an enormous room, completely bare, with no furniture except for a large table covered with a green tablecloth. Behind the table, there were five chairs and in front of each chair a piece of white paper.

Jerome Fandor noticed strange writing. Names, Russian names, each followed by a date and preceded by a small black cross.

"Damn, that’s strange,” Jerome Fandor said, and he shivered as he looked around the room. “It’s like being in a cemetery or a mortuary.”

As he wondered what they planned to do with him, the Russians dropped him onto the floor, throwing him there like a package, a few yards from the large table.

“What am I doing here?” Fandor asked. “Is this a torture room or a tribunal?”

He did not have to wait long for an answer to his anguished question. Those who had been carrying him took a step back and five individuals entered the large room and took their places behind the large table.

Jerome Fandor immediately recognized one of the five new arrivals. It was the same man who had questioned him at Marfa Berena’s house a few hours earlier. It was the man who had lost his temper when Fandor had stated he was not a nihilist. The four other individuals, however, were complete strangers. Fandor was unable to see their faces since they all stubbornly kept their heads lowered

One alone stood out. This individual, located at the end of the large table, was rather far from Fandor. He had entered last and the journalist did not have a clear view of him, since the light was behind him. Despite that, the man instinctively turned his head to the side.

“That’s strange!” Fandor thought. “That’s very strange! I could swear that last one is a woman. For a moment, I thought...”

Fandor’s eyes filled with tears. The brave, intrepid man was overcome with emotion at that very moment. He did not have the courage he needed to complete his thought.

What had poor Fandor believed? Of course, he had been the victim of a hallucination. And that hallucination, under the circumstances, took on a tragic nature. Jerome Fandor thought he had recognized Helene! He thought that the woman, whom he could barely see, walked and looked like the woman he loved above all.

Obviously, he was crazy to even imagine that Helene could be there! The young woman would never have been involved with this type of crowd. It was just impossible for her to be there.

The journalist turned his head away. He did not want to maintain such a cruel illusion. He did not want to think such mad, such impossible thoughts.

“I’m losing my mind,” he grumbled. “Helene cannot have any idea what has happened to me. And if I die, I'll die without having seen her again...”

Die. Was he really going to die? Would he not be able to convince, the triumph, to persuade

those who were to hear him that he was innocent of everything they charged him with?

“Come on,” he grumbled. “It’s now or never. I must control my nerves. I will not allow them to assassinate me! They have to hear me.”

At that very moment, one of the five people who had just entered the room, the man who had interrogated Fandor, slowly stood up.

“My brothers,” he declared in a deep, solemn voice. “You know why we are gathered here today. You know why you have been summoned here. We have to judge a man. We have important decisions to make.”

The extraordinary speaker paused and pointed at Jerome Fandor, still lying bound on the ground and quite incapable of moving.

“This man,” continued the Russian, “This man has played us for fools. I’ll make him repeat his last words briefly, however. I don’t want the shadow of a doubt left in your minds. I ask your permission to interrogate him again.”

Jerome Fandor, who had not missed a word of this speech, saw the four others nod at the judge in approval. That latter stared at Fandor.

“I’ve already asked you a question," he declared. “I will ask you again. Are you a nihilist?”

Jerome Fandor grated his teeth. He found the question intolerable. He had spent enough time in Russia, in fact, to understand that just being suspected of being a nihilist would certainly result in a death sentence. He was not a nihilist. He didn't even know the entire nihilist doctrine. So, wasn’t it stupid of them to persist in reproaching him for feelings he did not share?

Through his gag, Jerome Fandor shouted, “I don’t know who you are. I don’t know what you plan to do with me. But one thing I do know is that there are five of you and I stand alone. You don’t have to be afraid. So why do you leave me bound and gagged as I am? Remove my bonds and then, and then I’ll answer you!”

The judge shrugged and said, “We don’t free miserable wretches that may be dangerous.”

He was about to continue speaking when the woman, the only woman in the group of five judges, suddenly interrupted, “That’s just. The accused is entitled to defend himself freely. And if it pleases my comrades, I’ll release him immediately.”

She stood up and walked toward Fandor. At that moment, the journalist was even more upset than before.

The voice of that woman, of the woman who had interceded for him, who had asked to have his bonds removed, how strangely had that voice resonated in his being, as if re-awakening painful echoes in his thoughts! That voice, that gentle voice with its musical intonations, seemed familiar to Jerome Fandor.

“My God, my God,” he said to himself. “That’s Helene’s voice.”

Yet, at the same time, Jerome Fandor thought that, under the sway of emotion, given his fright, which was completely natural, caused by his successive adventures, he had to be very mistaken.

Obviously, Helene was not there. She could not be there.

Despite all that, however, Jerome Fandor could not help but look at the young woman as she prepared to free him. But, just then, one of the other judges stood up quickly. A young man, trying to look gallant.

“No,” he protected. “Don’t move sister Olga. I will free the prisoner.”

Jerome Fandor would have cheerfully cursed the interloper, but he restrained himself. He was in fact, relieved that they were removing his bonds and the gag and, despite everything, this simple gesture gave him renewed hope.

He stood up slowly, took two or three deep breaths, looked at the chief judge and said, “I’m all yours, now. Speak. Question me. What do you want to know?”

The judge glared and asked, “Are you a nihilist?”

“No,” Fandor replied. And the journalist shivered.

As he finished speaking, the judge raised a vengeful hand in the air and shrieked in rage, “In that case, may you be cursed, you and all your descendants.”

Dumbfounded at first, Fandor regained his composure and proudly repeated, risking the ire of those who had the power of life and death over him, “I am not a nihilist. I know nothing about nihilism. It is possible that the philosophical theories that provide the basis for this doctrine contain some kernel of truth but one thing is certain, and that is that I hate direct action, I do not tolerate assassination, even for political reasons. Now, if you don’t believe me...”

He did not have time to continue.

The anger that he had already noticed on the judges’ faces seemed to grow more intense. They all stood up. Only the young woman named Olga, the young woman who looked and sounded like Helene, remained seated and calm.

The chief judge said, “Shut up wretch. Shut up!”

Fandor lost his temper and said, “I’ll shut up if I feel like it! I’ve had enough of these interrogations! Who are you! Are you regular judges? What kind of court do you hold?”

“Shut up!” the judge repeated.

But Jerome Fandor ignored him and said, “You want to find me guilty, at any price, of something. Well, too bad for you. I won’t take part in this farce. I am innocent. If you want me dead, then kill me, but don’t look for excuses.”

With that Fandor fell silent. He was out of breath. With his vehement outburst, he had unloaded all of the rage that had accumulated in his heart.

“Now,” he thought. “These people will certainly do away with me. Too bad! I’ve given them some of their own medicine. I’ve been accused of being an assassin for so long that now I shall scream!”

At that moment, the intrepid young man felt that he had reached the end of his life. Since he could no longer do anything to save his life, he decided that it should end quickly, without glory, without panache, by defying the judges and throwing their cowardice in their faces.

Jerome Fandor was stunned by the response he received.

The chief judge stood up. The serious man seemed to be quivering. He seemed to be overwhelmed with rage. Only his superb willpower kept him from throwing himself at Fandor, although he must have wanted to punish him for his insolent behavior.

“Listen,” he said slowly. “You don’t know what you’re saying. You’re just talking off the top of your head. That’s why you’re uttering such stupidities. So, you say you’re not a nihilist? Well we thought otherwise, but we were wrong. And that’s most unfortunate for you. You want to know who we are? We’re exactly what you see before you. We’re nihilists.”

Jerome Fandor was dumbfounded. How, after being hung by the Tsar’s civil servants, after being sentenced to death for being a suspected nihilist, had he now had the misfortune of falling into the hands of the nihilists just as he was boasting at the top of his lungs that he did not belong to their party?

Overwhelmed with emotion, Fandor said nothing.

The judge continued, “We are nihilists and it is precisely because we are nihilists that everything that happened occurred. Do you understand?”

“Of course not!” roared Fandor.

“You will.”

Crossing his arms, raising his eyes as if looking for some radiant vision overhear, the conspirator continued, “We are nihilists. We all want a society in which even the humblest can attain happiness. We fervently believe in a universal event, which will eradicate the strong, the powerful, the rich, the leaders and will eliminate all iniquities that arise out of strength, power, wealth and authority. We do not believe in God, the Tsar or laws. We are the enemies of all those who take part in the sacrilege of order or defense. Do you understand?”

“Well...”

Despite himself, Fandor was interested. It was very obvious that the man speaking to him was convinced and inspired.

Of course, Fandor had read, in many books discussing the Russian social situation, that the nihilists were, above all respectable. He knew that the conspirators could occasionally commit excesses, but he also knew that their theory was based on profoundly respectable principles. Despite, himself, Fandor respected the judge.

“Damn!” he thought with his Parisian sense of humor, “Hats’ off to this man!”

The nihilist continued, “Guided by these feelings, we learned that you had wanted to kill a police chief. We don’t know everyone who is a nihilist, but we do recognize actions. What did we think? Don't try to understand. We decided that this man wanted to kill Boris Pokroff, he dreamed of destroying a wretched police chief, an agent of the Tsar. He must be a nihilist!”

The judge paused and Jerome Fandor asked, “So?”

“So, since we were convinced that you supported our cause and knowing that you had made a courageous gesture, we realized that you ran the risk of becoming a martyr, that the authorities would not be lenient with you, and we understood that you would be sent to the gallows and that you, who had dreamed of freeing people, would be hanged like a criminal.”

“That almost happened!" said Fandor.

But the people in the room did not hear his interruption.

The judge continued, “We could not support that. We have access to a great deal of intelligence. Our cause attracts new supporters every day, has won over civil servants who seem to be most attached to the State. Listen and you will understand.”

“I’m listening with all my soul,’ said Fandor. “I find this most interesting.

He was still jeering but he wondered, in reality, what was going to happen and how this scene, in which he played a very important role, would end.

The nihilist continued, “The hangman who executed you is a nihilist. He hates his work and does it only to soften the final moments of those sentenced to death. We asked him not to execute you. We looked for a way to save you and we found one. An iron ring was hidden under the shroud to prevent the rope from strangling you. And it worked. You fainted, looked dead, and were thrown into a grave. Then, when the authorities left, you were pulled back out.”

“Bravo,” joked Fandor.

But the judge continued on, “We were all overcome with joy. We were convinced that we had saved one of our brothers. We might not have suspected otherwise except that, by chance, the hangman informed us about certain conversations that took place in the prison, in which people stated that you had spoken out against nihilism. So, we grew suspicious and we interrogated you.”

“Perfect, perfect.”

Jerome Fandor grimaced as he listened to the judge’s final words and when the man stopped talking the journalist asked, “So you obtained information. You know that I’m not one of you. I’m far too honest to take refuge in a lie. And I’ll tell you the truth. Not only am I now a nihilist, but I went to the house of the chief of the secret police with a goal much different than assassination in mind.”

“What goal?”

Jerome Fandor hesitated a moment, thinking. Should he announce that Boris Pokroff was Fantomas? Should he reveal that information to total strangers when such a revelation could have such heavy, tragic consequences? He hesitated and then made his decision.

“That’s my secret,” said Jerome Fandor. “I cannot tell you.”

But that simple declaration aroused the wrath of the judges once again.

In a mocking tone, the Russian who seemed to be presiding over the strange tribunal said, “Do you have such terrible secrets?”

“Perhaps...”

“Are you implying that you cannot disclose these confidences to anyone?”

“Without a doubt.”

“In that case, you will be surprised by our verdict.”

Jerome Fandor felt fear wash over him again. The situation was clear. There had been a misunderstanding. He had been saved from the gallows because they thought he was a nihilist. And he had just confessed that he was not. What could happen? What decision would they make?

Jerome Fandor asked, “What are you going to do with me? You saved me by mistake, but I thank you any way. I’m not a member of your party, but

I respect it. What will you decide?”

The judge shrugged, “I don't even need to consult my colleagues before telling you. Your own words, your own feelings should be a clue for you. There are things that are secret by nature. There are incredible mysteries that no one can reveal. You said as much yourself. Things that have to be kept hidden. You decide what is to be your fate now, you who have seen our faces, you who could recognize the nihilist leaders, you who would do us so much harm.”

Hearing these words, Jerome Fandor grew pale. Yet, he did not want to admit defeat. He just wanted to keep up a good appearance and, if there was any means in which he could save himself, he wanted to try it since he considered it cowardly to give up without trying.

“I don’t have to decide my fate!" Fandor said. “Yet, I still have a few things to add. It is true that I now know terrible secrets about you. It is true that I could harm you. Yet it is also true that you saved me from death. That should reassure you as to my conduct. I’m not a member of your party, but I demand you give me the same respect I have decided to give you. I give you my word of honor, and you can believe this, that no one will ever learn what I have learned, through surprise and error...”

Jerome Fandor stared in the eyes of the nihilist. He thought that he had touched him, moved him, convinced him

The nihilist slowly shook his head and said, “I’m not the leader, but I do have heavy responsibilities. Personally, I would take you at your word, but in my official capacity, I have to doubt you.”

Then he uttered the sentence, “You will die.

You will die slowly.”



CHAPTER X - The Replacement



“You will die. You will die slowly...”

The inexorable sentence, the mortal verdict, resonated in the large room where the extraordinary nihilist revolutionary tribunal judged the unfortunate Jerome Fandor, who remained impassive as he heard it.

In fact, he had foreseen the obvious outcome of the proceedings. He knew that, unless some miracle occurred, nothing could save him. The death sentence did not surprise him and only surprise could have forced some response from him. But Jerome Fandor could not be touched by fear.

“Well!” he simply said, bowing to the judges. “If I have to die, then let your will be done. Yet, why do you want to torture me? And what do you mean by a slow death?”

The chief judge smiled calmly.

“A slow death is one that leaves no traces. Your body could be bothersome for us. By taking your life, we are taking a security measure to prevent dangers of all kinds. Under these conditions, we have to consider everything and that is why we will make sure that your death will not set the police on our trail.”

Jerome Fandor shivered when he heard this.

While the void did not frighten him, while he had long prepared for the eternal night of the tomb, he could not keep his flesh from reacting to the idea of torture.

“And!" he asked, “What will this slow death entail?”

“Well decide.”

The judge, who had remained standing throughout his discussion with Fandor, suddenly sat down. He turned to look at the other judges, their serious faces, completely motionless, were as hard as steel.

“What is your decision?” he asked. “In keeping with our laws, I have to pronounce a sentence, but I don’t determine the means of execution. That is your role.”

Just then something strange happened, something the nihilist had not planned.

The young woman who, up to that point, had remained almost motionless, appearing to take no notice of the discussions, suddenly stood up.

“Brothers,” she said, in a voice that quivered while revealing a strong will. “Brothers, what we are about to do is unjust.”

Naturally enough, these words provoked a sense of scandal. The revolutionary judges sat up, looked at their sister, eyes filled with questions.

The young woman repeated, “What we are about to do is monstrous!”

“What do you mean?” the chief judge asked.

His pale face flushed. Most certainly, he hated the words of pity that he expected the young woman to utter. All the members of the tribunal were filled with emotion. But, as they watched their colleague stand up to speak, they experienced a violent emotion mingled with anger. Jerome Fandor was as upset as all of them.

Oh, that woman’s voice, that voice he was hearing for only the second time, yet which brought back so many memories. Was it possible for him to be so wrong? Was it possible that all of his senses were mistaken?

Jerome Fandor felt tears well up in his eyes. He who remained so calm when his death sentence was pronounced shivered now as heard this woman’s voice, that voice that resonated in his heart like music.

“That’s my beloved Helene’s voice,” he said to himself, and he stared at the young woman everyone called Olga, trying to make out her features.

At the same time, he forced himself to think logically. And with cold logic, he forced down the crazy thoughts that swept into his mind. No, that woman could not be Helene. No that was not Helene who was about to speak.

Jerome Fandor thought, “Helene is not a nihilist. She cannot sit on a revolutionary tribunal and all the more so, if I understand correctly, since the tribunal is made of up the party heads!”

And it was mad for him think that Helene sat on the other side of that table with its repulsive green tablecloth. No, his beloved could not have joined such coarse people, who had sentenced him to death, without scruples, knowing full well that he was innocent, and only because they could not trust his word of honor.

Jerome Fandor clenched his fists and nervously dug his fingernails into the palms of his hands, drawing blood. But he felt no pain. His soul was filled with a single thought, Helene, as he strove not to get lost in the final adventures in the drama that would end in his death.

“What do you mean, Olga?" the chief judge asked the young woman, who looked very calm.

With an elegant, feminine gesture, she took a golden watch from her bodice and said, “It’s late. Twenty minutes are all that separates us from a nameless horror. Will we commit it?"

“What do you mean,” the chief judge asked again.

The young woman, Olga, was obviously convinced of what she was saying but, just as obviously, those who were listening to her did not understand her words or her attitude.

“Yet," the Russian woman continued,” in 20 minutes, my brothers, just a few steps from here, a frightful misfortune will fall on the head of an innocent woman. Did you not know that?”

The chief judge shook his head and said, “I don’t understand what you’re saying. Explain yourself, sister!”

The young woman took another step. She placed one of her delicate hands on the table. That hand seemed to tense as if under the sway of a terrible emotion. Yet, the nihilist continued in the same, calm voice, “A woman, a very poor woman, Marfa Berena, lives just a few yards from here. You all know her, my brothers. Well, do you know what is about to happen to her?”

Everyone remained silent. No one dared reply.

Vehemently, the young woman continued,

“The unfortunate woman has a son, Vassili Berena. Do you know what dangers Vassili Berena faces?”

The silence continued.

In a vibrant voice, Olga spoke again, “Vassili Berena was one of ours. Vassili was one of the most faithful of our followers. He dedicated himself body and soul to the cause, to nihilism. Well, brothers, you can hardly say you don’t know what has happened to him?”

And without giving anyone time to interrupt, the Russian woman continued, “Vassili Berena has been betrayed, his name given to the police. The executioner appointed by the Tsar was told to condemn the man and he did just that. Vassili

Berena is sentenced to 10 years of forced labor in the Siberian mines?

Just then the chief judge interrupted the young woman, asking, “Olga, why are you reminding us of such cruel matters? We can’t do anything for Vassili Berena!”

But Olga ignored the interruption and ardently continued, “Marfa Berena saw her son arrive a few days ago. Vassili could not go a long time without embracing his mother. He went to her house, tracked down like a wild beast. Unable to trust even his own shadow, he feared denunciation, fled from traps, slipped through the dark of night to Marfa Berena’s house. My brothers, the son and the mother were embracing one another...”

The chief judge, interrupted impatiently, “That is no doubt all true, Olga, but once again, what can we do?”

“They had,” she continued, “one minute of happiness. Old Marfa clasped her son to her bosom, imagining that she was once again living in a time when she did not have to fear the police. Yet, although the moment was happy, it was brief. When Vassili Berena wanted to leave, flee, start a wandering life running from the Tsar’s Cossacks, it was already too late. A spy had reported him. The police surrounded his mother’s house. She hid him, down in the cellar, where he is right now, crouching in the darkest corner...”

“Olga, Olga,” the chief judge interrupted.

The young woman opened her arms. “In 20 minutes,” she shrieked, her voice filled with rage. “I know that the police are going to come. I know that they will attack that little house in 20 minutes. They will search Marfa Berena’s house from top to bottom. She’ll be blessed if they don’t torch it! In any case, one thing is certain. Old Marfa, who is a nihilist, will see her son Vassili, who is also a nihilist, dragged off to the mines, in the depths of Siberia, a country from which he will never return.”

The young woman sobbed. Overwhelmed with emotion, she was a fright to see.

“And I,” she continued. “I will live in peace! And you, my brothers, you will also live in peace. And

that crime will be committed. No, no, the nihilists must not give up, Vassili Berena was one of ours and, on our honor, we must save him!"

These wild words, this violent declaration moved the tribunal.

Jerome Fandor recalled many things at that moment. He thought of poor Marfa’s sad face. He also remembered that, during the first few minutes he had spent in the good woman's cellar, he had heard discreet sounds nearby. The discussion, however, could not go on forever.

The chief judge asked Olga, “This is abominable, of course, but what can we do? Do you know how we can save Vassili Berena?”

Olga replied, “Yes, I do know how to save Vassili Berena! Blood buys blood. A human life saves another human life. For every crime, there is expiation.”

Then she turned suddenly to look at Fandor and fiercely added, “You blasphemed early, convict. You blasphemed against nihilism. That’s your crime. And that’s why I would have applauded the death you deserved. Yet, your life will be saved, at least if that’s what you want. You heard what I said, isn’t it true?”

Jerome Fandor nodded and replied, “Perfectly.”

His voice trembled. Since Olga had turned to look at him, since she had approached him, since the young woman had spoken directly to him, he was filled with the most extraordinary sensations.

Was it true? Could it be possible? Was it Helene? But as soon as he felt certain, doubt washed over him yet again.

“No,” he said to himself. “It could not be his beloved.”

Jerome Fandor, to be truthful, heard the words addressed to him, distant, indistinct sounds, as if through a fog.

Olga, however, continued, “You realize that one of ours, a nihilist, an honest man, is being tracked by the Tsar’s police? You heard me say that the poor wretch has been sentenced to 10 years in the Siberian mines? Listen to me. You were supposed to die a slow death and I’m offering you a chance to be saved. Would you agree to replace Vassili Berena? Those who plan to arrest him do not know what he looks like. Will you take his place in the chain gang? Do you want to go to the mines? If you agree, you might live, that is if the Tsar’s guards don’t kill you as they do so many others!”

Naturally, Jerome Fandor did not hesitate and replied, “Fine! I’ll go in Vassili’s place.”

He did not hesitate for two reasons. First, he still wondered anxiously if this Olga, if the woman speaking to him, was actually his wife Helene. And he was unable to make up his mind on that matter.

He was still too far from the young woman and there was too little light in the room for him to see her face clearly. And Helene, if it was her, would have had to change a few details in her dress and her hairstyle, to play her role as a Russian nihilist. Perhaps, in order to stay safe, to avoid recognition, she had even had to use make-up.

But, while Jerome Fandor did not know if Olga were Helene, and that only would have made him accept the young woman’s proposal, he knew other facts that meant he would never hesitate.

“If I refuse to go to the mines,” Fandor told himself, “These people will quietly kill me right away. If I agree, on the other hand, I’ll have a chance at getting away. After all, not everyone dies in the Siberian mines and some deportees do manage to escape.”

Jerome told the young woman, “I agree.”

The house of a Russian moujik. A very poor room that Jerome Fandor immediately recognized. Was it the same room in which he had opened his eyes, astonished to find himself alive after having been hanged a few hours earlier?

There was a woman in that room. Marfa Berena. She came and went, hurrying to serve a meager meal to Jerome Fandor, who ate hungrily.

Marfa Berena chattered like a magpie. “Take some of this roast, son!” she said in a loud voice. “Take some, Vassili! I’m sure you haven’t eaten so well in a long time.”

Jerome Fandor did not reply. Without the slightest scruples, the journalist took a copious serving of meat, glancing at his hostess without the slightest recognition.

Marfa Berena continued to shower him with thoughtfulness.

“Wait, wait, Vassili!” she said in a shrill voice. “I’ll get you a bottle. I’ll bring it up from the cellar you were hiding in.’

Still, Jerome Fandor said nothing.

Marfa Berena suddenly crossed the room, calling, “Vassili! Vassili!”

Then, since Jerome Fandor stubbornly refused to reply, she continued, “Vassili! You’ll have to get up early tomorrow, to get away, if they don’t arrest you tonight. I’ll open all the double windows. Then, when dawn comes, you’ll wake up on your own.”

And Marfa Berena opened the double windows, roughly shoving aside the shutters that had covered them.

“Vassili! Vassili!” the old woman called again. “It’s hard to see. I’ll turn the lamp up.”

Still Jerome Fandor said nothing and the loquacious old woman was not satisfied. She walked quickly over to Fandor and this time, whispered in his ear, “Listen. Do you know how to sing?”

Hearing that question, Jerome quickly abandoned his silence. He seemed to be overwhelmed with impatience. He turned toward the Russian woman.

“No, he declared!" furiously. “I don’t know how to sing. When I sing, the birds cry.”

Jerome Fandor used a little humor to cover up his bad mood. In fact, the journalist was justified in not feeling terribly cheerful. There was nothing particularly joyful about his situation. This is what had happened to him. The revolutionary tribunal had taken Olga’s advice under consideration. They had decided to take Jerome Fandor to Marfa Berena’s house. There, he was to pretend that he was Vassili and turn himself over to the police when they came to arrest the nihilist. And Fandor would be arrested and sent to the mines and the audacious subterfuge would save old Marfa Berena’s son. For lack of any better idea, Jerome had accepted.

Yet, despite his respect for the arrangements, Jerome could not keep from cursing old Marfa Berena who, since she was eager for the strategy to work, was doing everything in her power to attract the attention of the police, to make sure they would arrest the man posing as her son as quickly as possible. Marfa Berena called Vassili. She opened the window, she turned up the lamp.

Damn!” thought the journalist who, despite everything, had retained a shred of hope, “I have no illusions left. There’s nothing to be done for it. This crazy old woman will get me arrested!”

And Jerome Fandor was not wrong. Marfa Berena’s comings and goings had not gone unnoticed by the police who, as Olga had said, had surrounded the house in order to arrest Vassili. As Jerome Fandor was finishing his slice of roast, someone violently knocked at the door.

“Open up, in there. Open up now.”

Marfa Berena hurried over to the door. She grew pale and shook all over.

Good lord!” she moaned. “Who can that be knocking at the door?"

The pounding intensified.

“Open!” yelled a deep voice. “Open up, old lady, or I’ll knock the door down!”

Marfa Berena did not want to give in too quickly. That would surely raise suspicions. She wailed, “I’m just a poor old woman and deserve respect.”

“Open up! Open up!” the deep voice replied.

Marfa Berena did as ordered. A she did so, she glanced at Jerome Fandor. Obeying the oath he had sworn, he stopped eating. He opened the door to a large cupboard and hid there, just carefully enough that people would think he was trying to escape, yet clumsily enough to let the police discover him. And they did.

A moment later, a Cossack lieutenant, face rough, movements awkward, pushed Marfa Berena violently out of his way.

“Your son?” he asked. “Where is your son?”

The old woman clasped her hands and replied, “I don’t know.”

The Cossack lost his temper, yelling, “You know very well where he is. Go and get him.”

Just then, Marfa Berena truly did lose control. She was a nihilist. She was terribly afraid of the police and she completely forgot the role she was to play.

“My son is not here,” the old woman stated. “Have pity on me!”

But the sinister Cossacks who had entered the humble dwelling had no use for mercy or pity. The officer stomped his foot.

“If you do not turn Vassili over to me,” he said. “I will take my vengeance. Your house will be tossed, your furniture will be burned and I will have the soldiers whip you.”

As he spoke, he raised a large crop to poor Marfa.

He said, “Do you understand me? Do you want me to give you a good whipping?”

The crop whistled through the air. Yet, just as the terrible whip was about to strike the old woman’s shoulder, a surprising event occurred, something no one could have suspected. The officer suddenly turned about. He tripped over his large boots and his forehead struck the wall. At the same moment, the crop he had been brandishing was torn violently from his hands, broken in two and thrown to the ground.

A firm voice stated, “Here I am. You’re looking for me, so go ahead and arrest me. But you have no right to hit my mother!”

What a strange thing! The man who turned himself over, the man who said, “Here I am.” The man who had shoved the officer and firmly stated “You have no right to hit my mother.” That man was not Vassili Berena, but Jerome Fandor!

Jerome Fandor had, in fact, just become a glorious victim to his knightly habits. Of course, he had no tender feelings for the Berena family, mother or son, who through sheer selfishness had placed him in such an unfortunate position. Yet, Fandor could not ignore the officer’s brutality.

Marfa Berena was a woman. Marfa Berena was old. The young man’s heart had skipped a beat when he saw that the brute was about to hit her. Instinctively, Jerome Fandor felt no anger against the old Russian woman. Was she not trying to save her child? To protect him? Was she not trying to keep her son out of the Russian penal colony? That terrible Siberian mine to which so many young people were sent, never to return?

“Here I am,” Fandor yelled.

He crossed his arms to keep from throwing himself on the officer who had recovered his balance and was rapidly walking in Fandor’s direction. And, as is always the case when a brute is justly reprimanded, the officer was enraged.

“Wretch!” he shouted. “You dare raise your hand to me? I don’t know what’s holding me back!”

Jerome Fandor cut him off with a single word. “Fear,” he said.

And, since this extraordinary reply left the officer flabbergasted for a moment, Jerome Fandor continued, “You have orders to arrest me. You must take me to the chain gang or face the consequences. Make sure you don’t kill me. You won’t outlive me for long.”

Obviously, Jerome Fandor was just talking off the top of his head. In fact, he knew nothing about the officer’s orders or responsibilities. Yet, Fandor spoke with assurance and easily convinced the other man.

The Cossack stepped back. He glared at Jerome Fandor, eyes burning with hatred.

“Fine,” he said in a hoarse voice. “You’re right. I’m responsible for your life until I’ve taken you to the chain gang. But once the chain gang has set out, anything can happen! The papers are signed, there’s no longer any control. Listen to me, dog. I’ll be the one accompanying that bunch of deportees to Siberia and I don’t want you to finish the trip. You’ll die along the way.”

The officer was panting, voice filled with rage, as he waved his fist in front of Fandor’s face.

Fandor did not look concerned. He cast a mocking glance at old Marfa Berena who, frightened, pale as a ghost, did not dare say a word.

Calmly, Jerome Fandor continued, “Do your duty. Arrest me!”

Valiant and courageous, when he should have been frightened, Jerome Fandor commanded his torturers. The officer motioned with his arm. The brutal Cossacks fell into step behind him, prepared to take the unfortunate Jerome Fandor.

“Take him!”

They all took a step ahead.

Just then, Fandor had a sudden thought, “Good grief! I should have warned Juve.”

Thinking to ask the old woman for a favor, the fake Vassili Berena asked, “Will you allow me to embrace my mother?”

“No,” the officer said. “Come with us now!”

Jerome Fandor shrugged.

“I’m lost,” he thought. “But before I give up, I must find a way to take care of that beast. I broke his crop. Too bad! I would have enjoyed dusting his ribs with it!”



CHAPTER XI - Russian Penal Colony



“Obviously, my tribulations are not over. To date, my time in Russia has brought me nothing but misfortune and I greatly fear that it will continue to do so.”

Jerome Fandor conducted this conversation in his mind as the Cossacks escorting the brutal officer quickly dragged him in the direction of the St. Jean ostroghi, where the convicts to be sent to the Siberian mines were gathered. He was gripped by fear.

“Either one of two things will happen,” he supposed. “IT1 get out of this situation or I won’t.

But, truly, if I do get out of it, that will be very lucky, since it seems as if everything is in league against me.’

Everything was, in fact, in league against the courageous young man. The officer dragging him along was particularly hostile and his anger could have serious consequences. Moreover, the direction in which the escort was heading was significant for Jerome Fandor. Although his knowledge of the neighborhoods of St. Petersburg was imperfect, he was convinced they were taking him to the St. John prison. And Fandor was known at that prison. He would be at the mercy of the slightest incident, the slightest hazard. There, a fortuitous encounter, a careless word could bring about the worst catastrophes.

If, by some misfortune, one of the guards assigned to the men sentenced to death passed by just as Jerome Fandor was in the prison courtyard, there would be a terrible scandal. Whether he was a brute or a timid man, the guard would be most surprised that one of the convicts who had been executed the previous day was once again a member of the prison population.

It was clear that, if Jerome Fandor were recognized and if they noticed that the man who had been sentenced to death the previous day was still alive, an investigation would be ordered. And the investigation could not fail to determine how

Fandor had been torn from death. They would realize that he was not Vassili Berena and he would be rushed back to the gallows.

Jerome Fandor grimaced.

“Hmm!" he concluded, “I think it would be a good idea to avoid grumbling and stay quiet. It would be best I were to pass unnoticed?

Jerome Fandor stopped thinking about his own fate, although that fate was indeed horrible, and returned to the last scenes that had played out. How was he to interpret that? What should he conclude? Was it really Helene who had played the role of Olga on the extraordinary revolutionary tribunal that had just determined his fate? Was it Helene who had, to a certain extent, so skillfully intervened on his behalf? Strangely enough, Jerome Fandor was unable to arrive at a decision. Of course, he thought he had recognized his wife. He thought that the woman who had stepped between him and his jailors was, in fact, Helene. And it would have been natural for Helene to do so. If Olga was Helene, the young woman had done everything in her power to save Fandor. And she had done it most skillfully. It would have been impossible for anyone to obtain mercy for the man who had just insulted the nihilists. She had saved him from imminent death.

And, despite himself, Jerome Fandor felt obliged to say, “Obviously, being sent to the mines is better than a lingering death.”

And yet, although Jerome Fandor said that, if in fact he had noticed that it was Helene and that Helene had done her duty, he still felt very hurt by the young woman’s attitude. Despite his courage, his valiance or his manly energy, Jerome Fandor was, in fact, a sentimental poet. He thought that, while saving him, Helene had remained remarkably calm in his presence. He thought that the young woman he had seen on the revolutionary tribunal had remained completely indifferent to his fate and that, as a result, she could not really be his beloved.

“No!” said Juve’s friend. “If Olga had been Helene, she would have betrayed herself, at least by her eyes. She would have given me a look, a word... No, I was mistaken. That woman did not recognize me!"

Jerome Fandor preferred to believe that he had been mistaken and that he had not seen Helene than to admit that his beloved had been completely cold with respect the perils he face. It would have hurt her; she would have found it extremely painful.

But, Jerome Fandor would have viewed the situation from a completely different perspective if he had known that, for many long weeks, Helene had carried the most painful, the crudest, of injuries in her heart. After all, when she had returned from America, had Helene not seen Jerome Fandor apparently courting the unfortunate Natacha? Had she not, as a result of Fantomas’ cruel infamy, witnessed the kiss Natacha gave Fandor?

Yet, there was more.

Jerome Fandor did not believe that Helene had recognized him when, disguised as a servant, he had opened Boris Pokroff’s door. Yet Helene had indeed recognized her husband. She had very clearly seen that Alexis and Jerome Fandor were one and the same, and that had brought new pain to her heart since, at that moment, she decided that Jerome Fandor was at Boris Pokroff’s house to ask for the hand of Natacha, who he appeared to love, although Helene had no idea she was dead.

Since Jerome Fandor could not guess Helene’s feelings, he told himself, “I was wrong. Helene has no idea of the situation in which I find myself. Helene is staying peacefully in St. Petersburg. Juve will come. Juve will find her...”

Then Fandor added this unfortunate thought, “Juve will console her...”

The young man had, in fact, little hope of escaping from his terrible fate. As the escort dragged him toward the ostroghi, where he would be chained to some other poor devil to be sent like him to the mines, he decided that Siberia was a voracious killer of men. According to the official statistics, in fact, of all those that head out only three percent come back.

The Russian penal colony! Despite himself, Fandor shivered at the thought. He felt lost, lost in the vast world, so far from his loved ones, so far from those who could comfort him, who would at least be interested in his fate, that he felt there was no point in calling on them for help.

Of course, Jerome Fandor had traveled considerably. On many occasions, he had found himself in terrible circumstances and had had many brushes with death, but his situation had never been quite so bad as at this very moment, as he was about to set out for the Russian penal colony.

Walking for weeks before reaching the goal, putting up with the terrifying closeness of the most degraded assassins, the most infamous wretches, shoulders bruised by the heavy chain that bound the men in the gang together, ankles bleeding from the rubbing of the heavy rings. That was his immediate fate and it would not improve once he reached the penal colony, if he did not die from fatigue and exhaustion along the way.

The Russian penal colony! The pestilential mine from which they took copper. Jerome Fandor had read descriptions. He knew what kind of hell it was. He could already imagine the narrow winding tunnels the miners had to descend, risking their lives. And he knew that there was a machine gun at the end of each tunnel. He knew the orders. If a single miner rebelled for a single moment, the machine gun would immediately spit out bullets, gunning down entire ranks of convicts.

And that was not the only form of death that hung over the heads of the unfortunate convicts. There were also the guards’ clubs and the pestilential fevers.

It was true, as a sadly informed Russian writer had dared to shout in the face of the world: the Russian penal colony was horrific; those sent there are, without fail, condemned to go mad, unless death puts an end to their suffering.

Jerome Fandor shivered at these thoughts. He trembled with disgust and anger. He wondered how long he could withstand the terrible voyage, the horrible imprisonment. Above all, he was furious at the thought that he had done nothing to deserve such treatment. If he had been able to talk for a few moments with an honest magistrate, not only would he have been absolved, but they would have fallen at his feet, to thank him for unmasking the terrible Fantomas.

Suddenly, Jerome Fandor stood taller. Up to that point he had walked with his head down. Yet now, he hastened his pace, stood proud and said, “It doesn’t matter. I wanted to do my duty. I have no right to complain!”

It took the escort 20 minutes to take him to the ostroghi. There everything was in turmoil and the courtyard was filled. Just as people had traveled far and wide to attend Fandor’s hanging, there were many curiosity-seekers who wanted to watch the tragic departure of the Tsar’s chain gang.

His escort led him over to a group of convicts.

“Stay there!’ the officer ordered.

Jerome Fandor, who realized that all resistance was futile, respected the order. He stood still and looked about at the tragic scene. The departure of a chain gang is always accompanied by horrific details. The atmosphere is uncomfortable, the breeze filled with tears. Those who are leaving know they will not be coming back. Those who watch the men depart know that they will all die.

The convicts instinctively try to maintain an air of pride. They do not want to acknowledge their fear. Among the spectators, there is an involuntary movement of pity and, sometimes even a horrible tendency to crack jokes.

This was the time for society to take its vengeance, the time when honest people, who grew stronger, to take pride in their strength and use it abusively. The convicts who were leaving for Siberia were brought into the courtyard in groups of ten, where they were placed in groups, without much concern for the reasons for their convictions. Simple political prisoners, nihilists being sent to die in Siberia for their opinions, were brought in side by side with murderers who have been saved from the gallows by imperial clemency. They were all very pale. Yet they all tried to smile.

But there came a moment when the most intrepid turned serious, when the most courageous could not help but shiver. When the convicts were brought out of the prison, they were made to stand in rows in front of a large log. It was time to link the chains, to bind the wretches like evil beasts. Each convict was required to place his right foot on the log. The blacksmith would then choose a large iron ring, roughly the size of the man’s leg, and heat it until it was red, then white hot. It would be struck with a chisel and opened. Then the man’s foot would be placed in the ring and it would be riveted shut.

It was a frightful operation. The blacksmith had to work while the ring was still hot. If the man being chained made the slightest movement, he would be seriously burnt. If he merely trembled, if the blacksmith missed his target, the heavy hammer would pound down on the wretch’s ankle, breaking it. Accidents were common. Every time a chain gang set out, four or five men were horribly injured. Many men were crippled for life. Some even died.

Jerome Fandor knew all this. The horrors that took place before his eyes were not new to him. Yet he could not help but shiver as he watched. Of course, he had never imagined that one day he too would be a convict and that he would have to face the terrible torture of the chain.

It was his turn. The guards called him. His bit his lip and stepped forward. He told himself, “Don't move! My word, this is much more important than having a photograph taken.”

To master his nervousness, to dampen his natural fear, he counted the hammer blows.

“One... two... three...”

The blacksmith must have been a skilful man. In any case, he seemed to have a talent for this sinister type of work. His violent blows were regular. Sparks flew from the hot iron and the ring gradually took shape. Just then, suddenly, Jerome

Fandor shivered. A light flashed in his eyes. He frowned, and shrugged imperceptibly.

What was Jerome Fandor thinking? What extraordinary idea had just run through his mind? The journalist did not move.

In a very low, persuasive voice, he said, “Blacksmith!”

The blacksmith turned his head, hesitating and looking surprise, and said, “What?”

What was Fandor’s goal? Why had he spoken to the worker? During the few brief seconds that the blacksmith had stopped working, Jerome Fandor quickly bent down over the iron ring that would attach him to the chain of men and spit on the iron. Was this a simple gesture of disdain?

Was it bravado? Without a doubt the jailers had to think so since they paid it no attention.

The blacksmith trembled, paused for a second, and muttered, “Ah.”

His heavy hammer shook in his hands. He looked Jerome Fandor straight in the eyes. The journalist did not look away. It was an extraordinary moment. But only Jerome Fandor and the blacksmith knew how tragic it was.

The blacksmith, who had grown pale, shouted, “Stay still!”

And his hammer started to spin in the air and once again fell on the ring.

Jerome Fandor regained his composure. He was even, if that could be possible, calmer than before and anyone who observed him closely would no doubt have noticed an ironic smile tugging at the corners of his lips.

“So, it’s not all over,” murmured Fandor.

But what did those words mean? Of course, it was not all over. The chain gang had not even set out.

Jerome Fandor, his iron ring on his ankle, the ring through which the heavy iron chain had been pulled, was shoved by the guards toward a group of convicts. They were in the same gang, chained to one another, chains slipped through the rings on their right ankles, making them one, linking them to the main chain that connected five such groups.

Naturally, these chains were very heavy. To keep from injuring themselves while walking, the convicts had to carry the chains by hand. Although the burden seemed less heavy if everyone supported a part of the weight, the first few days were still completely exhausting. An abominable torture.

Jerome Fandor, firmly chained to his group, remained motionless.

Those on the chain looked at him and asked, “Comrade, you’re not Russian?”

“No,” Fandor replied.

“Comrade, you seem indifferent about your fate?”

“What’s the point of complaining?”

“Comrade, you'll be singing a different song in two weeks! We’re going to hell!”

Jerome Fandor shrugged. He had just realized that he had unfortunately been chained to a gang of common criminals. No doubt they had guessed that he was a political deportee and they would add to the torture of the guards by letting him carry most of the chain. It was just another of the cruelties of this terrible trip that was about to start.

The chained men were forced, unfortunately, to put up with the traveling companions the guards gave them. As a result, convicts who hated one another deeply were obliged to travel side by side. The stronger one would oppress the weaker.

Every day, bloody dramas played out between people on the same chain.

Jerome Fandor was not mistaken. Fandor, who generally got along with everyone, who was pleasant to everyone, had the misfortune to be chained to a total wretch, one of those horrible individuals who do not seem to have any redeeming features.

The entire time the departure ceremony lasted, the horrid man sang terrible songs or made obscene jokes. Jerome Fandor did not pay him too much attention. Yet, when the chain started to move to the beat of the drums that pounded out the departure order, a frightful torture started for the journalist for, in fact and quite naturally,

Jerome Fandor knew nothing of the art of walking on a chain gang. He did not know how to carry his chain; he did not know how to walk without injuring himself. One hundred yards from the prison, Jerome Fandor’s feet were already slick with blood. And that was when his partner cruelly invented a frightful joke.

Just when Jerome Fandor least expected it, in fact, the brute stopped. He dropped his chain which meant that Jerome Fandor, who was trying to walk normally, suddenly had a formidable weight to drag. He stumbled; he fell. The guards were never far, always ready to strike with their whips or their guns.

And this might have continued if Jerome

Fandor, who was energy itself, had not suddenly decided, one day, after a certain time, to set things right.

Jerome Fandor turned around, in fact, and looked at his companion who seemed to take pleasure in harassing him.

"Listen to me,” he said with extraordinary calm. “I give you my word as both a prisoner and an honest man. Try to understand. This is serious.”

The other man laughed and said, “What? The gentleman wants to preach?”

“No,” Fandor replied. “I simply want to warn you about something.”

And looking the other man straight in the face, Fandor slowly said, “In exactly five days from now, I will escape. At the moment, my good man, one of two things will happen. Either you continue to act like an imbecile and, in that case, I won’t leave here before I bash your head in or you’ll be quiet and I’ll spare you. You’ve been warned. Think about it!”

“In five days, you claim to be escaping. But...”

Jerome Fandor cut him off, “In five days, I’ll be leaving.”

“How?”

“That’s my secret.”

“You’re crazy.”

“There are wolves!”

“I don’t care!”

“You’ll starve!’

“I don’t care!’

“There are the guards...”

“I’ll trick them!”

“You won’t be able to break your chains.”

“Yes, I will!”

“Are you serious?”

“Do I look like I’m laughing?”

The prisoner looked at Jerome Fandor and fell silent. He did not feel like playing tricks on him. He did not understand, but he admired the dark energy shining in the young man’s eyes.



CHAPTER XII - A Profitable Error



The column of convicts was already far from Saint Petersburg. Although, for economic reasons, Russia had kept the system by which prisoners were taken, on foot, to the penal colony, a horrible system which all civilized nations had abolished, it was no less true that the penitentiary administration would, as needed, adopt other processes.

After many lengthy steps, the men had been loaded into miserable cars coupled to the end of a freight train, which had rolled for two days without stopping. With the passing miles, the nature of the landscapes they had traveled through had changed so abruptly that it was impossible to ignore the distance traveled. They had left behind the laughing, wooded plains that surrounded the Russian capital and moved into the deserted, monotonous steppes. The prisoners presumed that icy, deadly Siberia was close at hand.

The cold, which had been tolerable when the chain gang set out, had intensified abruptly, bringing winter, with its horrible pains, procession of suffering and frightful tortures. Snow fell continually, piling up in the convicts’ wretched clothing, freezing on the men and forming sharp needles of ice on their hands and necks, without the slightest compassion or pity.

Jerome Fandor bore with this procession of misfortunes and calamities with his usual carefree attitude. Perhaps, because he was European—and French at that—he felt the cold more than his sinister traveling companions. He let nothing show, however, and took pride in not complaining.

In the train cars into which they had been packed, the men, soaked, half dead, seemed to have fallen into a silent, beast-like stupor brought low by famine and winter.

Only Jerome Fandor, it should be said, seemed to retain a little bit of energy a presence of mind, a sense of courage. He alone, did not give up. The fire in his eyes revealed that he continued to dream of escaping as he had done so many times before when caught up in tragic circumstances.

His renown, moreover, was starting to spread among the convicts, who seemed to share a strange sense of solidarity. All too often, convicts hate one another. Brawls are not uncommon, murders are even frequent. Yet, the prisoners settle their quarrels among themselves. Certainly, no prisoner has ever called on a guard for protection against another prisoner.

The solidarity of the chain gang lies in the fact that the prisoners join forces when it comes to fooling the guards and Jerome Fandor

was well aware of this. He had even used that feeling, which is common to all galley salves in all countries, to impose silence on his ferocious chain partner, who could not help by be very favorably impressed when he heard the mysterious words Jerome Fandor had uttered. Although he had said nothing at the time, he had returned to the matter over and over again since then.

“Is it true,” he asked, “That you’re going to escape?”

“It’s true,” Fandor replied.

“You’re certain you’ll succeed?”

“I am.”

“You’ve calculated the thickness of the shackles?”

“The solidness of my irons is of no interest to me.”

“You have ways for dealing with hunger?”

“I will.”

“You have weapons for fighting the wolves?”

They had had the same conversation hundreds of times and the entire gang had grown aware of it. Everyone knew that the convict walking in the second group, the cheerful-looking blond man, planned to escape.

The men on the chain gang started to admire Fandor. In any setting, bravery, energy, courage are enough to impose respect and instill admiration.

As soon as Jerome Fandor posed as a future escapee, those around him started to consider him a leader. And the journalist had no qualms that they would betray him. Although he had plans to escape, there was no danger involved in telling those nearby about them. Prisoners do not betray one another, knowing full well that the slightest betrayal would be punished immediately by death.

The days passed.

Already, 24 hours had passed since they had left the train, and the chain gang found itself in the middle of a dessert, in a country where solitude increased the wild beauty. It was an immense plain, rigorously flat. Snow covered it as far as the eye could see and the horizon was absolutely, blindingly, monotonously white.

At seven each evening, the chain gang stopped. Then, as the harassed men slipped to the ground, with the sole hope of letting their chain rest, of no longer feeling its weight, those who guarded them climbed down from their horses, set up their tents, distributed the meager bread rations to the convicts and then settled down to a good dinner.

Every night, the guards slept in the same tent, taking turns setting it up. They also took turns at guard duty, something they spent little time thinking about since they all agreed that it would be impossible for a convict to escape and that even if one did he would not go far.

Jerome Fandor had noted all these details. Every night, the people on his chain questioned him. They all knew about the prison colonies in Siberia and were familiar with the bloody history of the chain gang. They provided Fandor with information.

“You want to escape?” said one. “Fine, but take care. Leaving here is not easy. Breaking your chain and escaping is almost impossible. Yet, that’s not even the most difficult part. Think about this, comrade. You have to eat and there’s nothing in this plain that surrounds us. You have to defend yourself and you have no weapons. Dozens of wolves will hound you."

Jerome merely smiled his usual ironic, determined smile in response.

“Fine. Thank you. I said that I would leave on the fifth day, so I will!”

They were all filled with curiosity and continued to question the young man, but he remained discreet.

“How will you do that?" they asked.

“You’ll see!"

“How will you break your leg irons?” “That’s simple."

“Do you have a saw?"

“No."

“A file?"

“No.”

“A chisel?”

“No.”

“Some sort of tool?"

“Nothing at all.”

And when the questions grew too insistent, Jerome Fandor merely smiled.

“Comrades, let me sleep. I don’t have long before I have to go and I need to save my strength.”

Then the hardest scoundrels surrounding the young man would fall silent religiously. They looked at one another, devastated. They were all convinced that their courageous companion was heading for certain death and would have liked to dissuade him.

But Jerome Fandor was stubborn and, in response to all objections, all comments, simply replied, “I want to leave.”

The fifth day arrived. It was even colder than usual and the snow had fallen all night.

Painfully, the column set out. Yet, a fever ran through all of Fandor’s companions in misery. They looked at one another, furtively, eyes filled with questions.

All of the convicts felt like Fandor’s accomplices, waiting for extraordinary events. They nourished the hope that something unexpected would benefit each of them.

“Will you take someone?” one asked Fandor.

The journalist shook his head and said, “No because I will not be able to break his shackles.”

“Yet you can break your own!”

“That’s not the same thing.”

The column proceeded painfully. Whispers spread through the rank and file.

“When will you leave?”

“Tonight.”

“During the night?”

“During the night.”

The news raced from one end of the column to the other.

The walk dragged on. They would have to wait to find out how the young man would leave, but waiting seemed intolerable. The skeptics chuckled.

“He lied!" people started to say. “You'll see. He won’t leave.”

And they always brought up the same arguments.

“Good grief, he won’t be able to break his shackles. They searched us too carefully at the start. No one has any tools. Not even him. Plus, he’ll die from hunger and cold, if the wolves don’t get him.”

At about noon, one convict roughly said to Fandor, “Look. Don’t you know Russia? You’ll understand. White plains and still more white plains. Thousands of miles to travel. Snow... cold... that’s what will stop you. I once found myself alone, when I was free, in these solitudes. I thought I would die. Stay.”

Fandor shook his head and said, “No, I’m going to leave!”

Night fell. The sun had set a long time ago, disappearing below the horizon. The cold and snow intensified. That day, the column set camp early because the guards, despite their warm furs, despite the alcohol they drank, despite the horses that carried them, were broken by fatigue.

The guards set up their tent. They invited the convicts to lie on the ground in groups, then threw a heavy tarpaulin over them. The snow piled up on it, covering them like a blanket.

“Are you leaving?” someone asked Fandor.

Fandor replied, “Soon.”

As the minutes passed, each one the same. Fandor gave no hint yet, instinctively, each of his companions in misery knew how to behave. They fell silent, remained still, did not to attract the guards’ attention.

At about midnight, however, Jerome Fandor raised himself part way and said, “Farewell, comrades.”

His voice did not shake. Those around him were much more emotional than he was.

“Do you know what you’re risking?” they said, yet again.

“I do.”

The journalist shook the hands that reached out to him. He was determined and did not hesitate. He preferred death over the torture of the penal colony to which he was headed. Yet the difficulties of escape were just starting.

His chain partner asked, “How will you break your shackles?”

“Like this,” Fandor said.

He bent down, lifted his right ankle a little and grasped the ring of iron riveted around his ankle with both hands.

“I’ll break it,” he said.

But the men around him shrugged since they all knew that the iron rings were solid and that trying to break them was mad. Yet, Jerome

Fandor seemed certain. He held the ring with his hand and struck it sharply with his shoe. Those watching were dumbfounded as they realized that he had barely hit the iron. Yet it was opening! Jerome Fandor merely had to pull it. How had he broken the ring?

Jerome Fandor appeared perfectly calm

“Easy as pie,” he said.

And he explained: “When the ring was welded around my ankle, I took some precautions. While it was still cherry red, I spit on it. The iron was suddenly cooled by my saliva. I managed to temper it somewhat, making sure that at one point my iron ring was not as solid as it should have been. The slightest blow could break it.

Moreover, the blacksmith saw what I did and he said nothing.”

No one responded. The young man’s explanation was very simple. Yet, it showed an uncommon presence of mind and the convicts instinctively realized that their fellow traveler was much more intelligent than they were. After a few minutes, however, they started questioning Fandor again.

“But, if you were certain that you could free yourself, why did you wait so long before breaking your irons? You could have escaped the first night!”

Jerome Fandor chuckled and replied, “No. Because they would have set the St. Petersburg police after me. Here, the guards won’t think of looking for me. Everyone will presume that I’ll die from hunger. I’ll be reported dead and that’s what I want.”

The men fell silent again. Obviously, the other convicts admired the young man.

Yet, one of them asked, “But are you really certain you won’t die? How will you deal with hunger, the wolves and the cold?”

Jerome Fandor smiled and said, “You don’t understand the means at my disposal.”

“What do you mean?”

“I have a name.”

“A name?”

“Yes, a woman’s name: Helene.”

Leaving his companions deeply dumfounded, Jerome Fandor made the most of the night and slipped from under the tarpaulin, crawling through the snow, escaping. He had not lied when he said that, once he was free, all he had to fight against the dangers he faced was Helene’s name. But thinking about his wife, thinking about the woman he adored, he would be able to fight, to conquer, if victory was possible. And Fandor quickly realized that his battle was a colossal one. Yet, luck smiled on him. Just as Fandor slipped out from under the tarpaulin, he had the good fortune to bump into one of the sleighs that accompanied the convoy, filled with provisions.

Jerome Fandor instinctively thought that it would be a good idea to fill his pockets with a few supplies. He bent over the sleigh, hiding behind it to avoid being seen by the guards watching over it. He managed to climb into the car and there he discovered a crate filled with boxes of tins.

“Hooray!” thought Fandor. “I’ve got boxes of preserves. The journalist picked up two. He was about to pick up a third when he realized that he had unfortunately made a noise of some kind and a guard was approaching. Remaining near the sleigh any longer would not be a good idea. Jerome Fandor rushed away

“Well,” he thought. “Two large boxes of tins mean I have at least four days of supplies. Well, within four days, I will either have reached a city or been eaten by wolves.”

In fact, wolves were turning out to be Fandor’s biggest worry. No more than two hours after leaving the chain, Jerome Fandor turned back and saw the shining eyes of several of the ferocious beasts following him at distance. He shivered.

“So,” he thought. “It’s started.

Yet he swept away his own fear and continued on his way. He walked five hours without stopping, following the stars, into the steppe. Then he stopped, half paralyzed by the cold. His feet hurt. The injury the shackles had caused to his ankle had opened and was bleeding.

“Let’s take a break,” Fandor said to himself.

“Let's eat and rest.”

He sat down in the snow, throwing rocks at the wolves who dared to approach. He opened one of the large boxes of preserves he had carried so painfully since the time of his escape. But after prying a lid off one of the tins, the young man shrieked in anger. Fortune had abandoned the young man. The tins he had carried contained no preserves, just black soap. At that moment, Jerome Fandor seriously considered hitting his head against the frozen ground in to the put an end to his agony. He knew what had happened. He knew that each sleigh carried large boxes of black soap to be used to grease the blades and prevent snow from building up, which would have made traction much more difficult. Although the explanation came easily enough, it did not advance Jerome Fandor’s cause.

Yet, a few minutes later, he was once again calm, his unlikely courage had returned. He pitched the two boxes of soap into the snow and headed off.

He said, “I’ll keep on as long as I have the strength to do so. No one will be able to say that I didn’t die fighting.”

And five hundred yards from there, Jerome Fandor was suddenly filled with joy.

“Good grief,” he said. “What is that?”

He started to run, like a crazy man. In the smooth snow, he had just noticed a long, characteristic swelling. Like an undulation of the soil, it ran across the entire plain, from one side of the horizon to the other. Jerome reached the swell and fell to his knees, exhausted.

“My God! My God!' he murmured. “So I will be able to get out of this hell!”

Luck smiled on the young man once again. He had reached the Trans-Siberian track. Yet, this did not guarantee that he would escape. Many, no doubt, would have even thought that escape was still impossible. Jerome Fandor did not share their opinion. Soon, he stood up and waved his arms like a man in the throes of delirium.

“Saved!” he murmured. “Saved! I have to climb aboard the first train. I have to find a way to hide in the cars. I’ll manage!”

Yet, as he uttered those words, his joy suddenly evaporated. As he put his project into words, Jerome Fandor suddenly realized the difficulties he would encounter. Of course, the train would pass by. He would most certainly see one of the Trans-Siberian trains. But how could he climb on board? How could he jump onto the train that would be speeding past him?

Jerome Fandor thought. The intrepid journalist recalled that he had once tried to stop a racing train. He was with Bouzille at the time, pursuing Fantomas. Unfortunately, the circumstances were quite different and Fandor could not use the means he had used then. With Bouzille, Jerome Fandor had operated a siding and signaled the locomotive engineer. This time, there was no siding and not only could Fandor not signal the engineer, he had to avoid catching his attention.

The journalist thought for a long time. He was about to despair when he suddenly started rubbing his hands.

“Well,” he said, “I’m about as stupid as they come.

And Jerome Fandor raced off to pick up the two boxes of black soap he had discarded a few moments earlier. What did he plan? What crazy idea filled his mind?

Jerome Fandor was perfectly reasonable. He had simply recalled that, in America, bandits had stopped an express train once by greasing the rails with black soap. The wheels of the locomotive slipped and the train stopped. The bandits made the most of the opportunity to rob it.

Jerome Fandor said to himself, “I’m a lot less demanding. All I want is for the train to slow enough that I can jump on board?

And then Jerome Fandor spent two long hours coating the rails with black soap over a distance of 150 yards. Once he had finished this exhausting work, he merely had to wait. The waiting seemed long. Night was falling when the whistle of a locomotive tore him from the state of sleep he had gradually fallen into. Jerome Fandor was on his feet within a second.

“Will I succeed?” he wondered.

The train sped ahead and the journalist’s mind filled with doubts. But he was wrong to worry. His plan had been a good one. As the train reached the soaped rails, the wheels of the locomotive started to slide this way and that. Surprised, the locomotive engineer applied the brakes. The train slowed. Fandor could not hope for better.

He ran along the ballast, grabbed on to a freight car with two hands, allowed himself to be dragged, almost fell under the wheels and, with a desperate effort, managed to climb aboard. The car contained freight of all kinds. It was covered with linoleum Jerome Fandor slipped beneath it.

At that moment, the intrepid young man made a joke, as he usually did in such situations.

“This is fine,” thought Fandor. “But I forgot to ask the employees. Which way are we heading? Is the train heading to St. Petersburg or to China?”

Jerome Fandor did not complete his joke. He had run out of energy. As the train accelerated, he collapsed in the car.



CHAPTER XIII - By the Order of the Tsar



While Fandor, who had miraculously climbed aboard the Trans-Siberian, was traveling in the speeding train, not knowing whether it was taking him to the Russian border or to the distant regions of eastern Asian, other trains throughout the world were crisscrossing countless other tracks. Other trains came and went, slowly or rapidly, carrying an important portion of humanity, constantly in motion. One of those trains that day was the large, weekly convoy, known throughout Europe as the Nord Express.

The Nord Express, which had left Paris the day before, had crossed the Russian border, in the middle of the previous night. The passengers had had to change trains. French railway cars could not travel on the tracks of the Russian empire, since the track gauge was larger in Russia than the rest of Europe.

Yet, this inconvenience, which took place in the middle of a cold, dark night, was more than overcome by the fact that the passengers had entered Russian territory ensconced in comfortable cars where they could end their night in comfort. Day came and the icy, deserted steppes they had crossed, steppes so uniformly white that they filled the surrounding landscape with a poignant touch of monotony, gradually made way for modest-looking houses, followed by small villages and finally towns.

Several people had gathered in the aisle of a first-class car and were looking curiously at the landscape that flew by. Young men and women, elegant, joyous, animated, whose professions were obvious. The men were carefully shaved and their slightest gestures portrayed scope and appeal. The women, with their expressions, figures and graceful, yet seemingly studied voices. Anyone who questioned their profession would have quickly corrected their opinion after glancing at the numerous suitcases and gigantic packages the passengers had accumulated at the ends of the car. Each bag bore a small label, with red letters: Imperial Theatre. It was a troupe of French performers who had come to spend the season in Russia. Most of them had never been to that distant country and they listened, dumbfounded, with a certain amount of respect as one of their colleagues, Mr. Melchior, who usually performed dramatic roles for the Comedie Francaise, explained, rolling his r’s dramatically, how they could manage to live well in Russia.

Turning to the actresses, Mr. Melchior recommended, “And, above all, ladies, take care with respect to the cold. The temperature in St. Petersburg goes down to more than 30 below and the newspapers have predicted a harsh winter.”

A pretty blond with delicate skin, Miss Luce, from Vaudeville, looked frightened.

“Good grief!” she said. “I fall ill with the first freeze in Paris. What am I going to do in this frightful country! I already regret signing my contract!”

Melchior started to laugh and said, “I’m exaggerating a bit. The wind is what determines the cold. There’s never any wind in Russia and people can withstand very low temperatures without difficulty. You just have to avoid traveling in open carriages or sleighs and you’ll make it through the winter without freezing the tip of your nose!”

Melchior stopped talking. A man had just stepped out of a previously closed compartment into the corridor to join in the conversation. He looked jovial, satisfied and enthusiastic.

“My children!” he shouted. “Just another half hour and we’ll be in the capital of the Tsars, in St. Petersburg, a city renowned throughout the world. We’ll see the magnificent Kremlin, that architectural masterpiece...”

“Excuse me, maestro,” Melchior interrupted, smiling. “But the Kremlin is in Moscow!”

The man stopped speaking and looked at Melchior, with an expression that was both dismayed and furious.

Then he continued, “That’s not important. St. Petersburg has its own monuments and artistic treasures. We just need to spend time admiring them. Plus, I know what I think of them and I do believe that I’ll discuss that matter in my lecture, in a truly new and original manner.”

“My dear maestro,” Melchior observed again. “Allow me to point out that we’ll arrive at the station in 10 minutes and that you are still in your pajamas. It might be a good idea to get dressed. Otherwise, we’ll lose a great deal of time when we arrive.”

The enthusiastic individual immediately retreated back into his compartment. The performers looked at one another, smiling.

“What a character!” said Madam Aurelia, an elderly actress who had traveled the world for over 40 years and played all of the noble mothers in the repertory.

Melchior, who was obviously the leader of the troupe, replied, “Yes, what a character, no doubt, but what a skillful man!”

“Well, who exactly is that Roger Darmont,” Miss Luce asked.

“Oh, that’s quite simple,” Melchior replied. “A man of letters without any literary baggage, like so many others found on the sidewalks of Paris. He doesn’t dare plagiarize the works of others, by appropriating them, because the written word remains and printed materials do get noticed. But, since he has no ideas of his own, he steals those of his colleagues, learns them by heart, and manages, when he can get the right financing, to travel about and repeat them as if they were his own, to any more or less willing, sleepy or snobbish audience. Roger Darmont is an opportunist, everyone’s favorite speaker. He has turned speaking into a veritable profession. And unwilling to settle for France and Paris, he has now set out to dazzle foreigners with his avalanche of words. Needless to say, Roger Darmont makes a lot of money doing that!”

The actor was interrupted by the arrival of a newcomer, who listened for a few minutes, smiling through his graying beard. He was another traveler from Paris who had discretely mingled with his compatriots during the trip.

He was pleasant to the performers, behaving modestly and correctly, unlike the people who usually revolved around the theatre world. A few hours after their departure from Paris, the gentleman had introduced himself to the actors. His name was Mr. Pol and he was a civil engineer on his way to Moscow for a study trip.

He must have been about 50 at most, although his thick gray beard, made him look older. Yet, the sparkle in his eyes and his lively facial expressions made people think he was a decade younger.

Mr. Pol responded to Melchior’s comments, saying, “You’re quite hard, dear sir on that poor lecturer! It’s natural for someone with the gift of speech to use it.”

Melchior protested, “You’ve never heard him speak? That Roger Darmont replaces oratorical talent with a skill for elocution that has nothing to do with the talent that made Cicero and, more recently, Lachaud so renowned. But you can judge for yourself if, as I presume, you are to be in St. Petersburg when he’ll give his famous lecture for which he is to be paid 4000 rubles.”

Mr. Pol shook his head and replied, “Unfortunately, I won’t be able to attend his conference. I have to leave for Moscow this very evening and it is for that reason that, before I leave the train, I have come to bid you farewell.”

This was a real surprise and the entire troupe was desolated.

What? Mr. Pol wouldn’t even spend 48 hours in St. Petersburg! They would not enjoy the pleasure of seeing him at the Imperial Theatre! He was about to disappear suddenly! To head deep into the heart of Russia!

The women, in particular, were devastated. During the trip, Mr. Pol had been so pleasant, gracious and respectful toward them, charming them. A few of them even nursed secret hopes of developing more intimate relationships with him at some later point.

In vain, Melchior attempted to convince the engineer to delay his departure by 48 hours. But Mr. Pol, who appeared sincerely upset by having to refuse, stuck to his plans.

At that moment, Roger Darmont came back out of his compartment and walked over to shake Mr. Pol’s hand. The speaker had dressed as he saw fit to face the rigorous temperature. He had placed an enormous astrakhan hat on his head and tossed three or four fur-lined cloaks on his back, along with a cape, which was also fur-lined. Sweat rolled down his scarlet face.

“So I won’t be cold,” he shouted.

The group smiled as they looked at him.

Melchior placed a hand on the man’s shoulder and said, “Really, you exaggerate dear fellow!”

Only after he had been assured that two cloaks were enough did Roger Darmont decide to go and remove the rest of his clothing.

“That’s it,” he said, confiding in Mr. Pol, “It’s essential that I avoid catching cold. My voice is like Sarah Bernhardt’s, worth its weight in gold. Can you imagine they are paying me 4000 rubles to speak for an hour! It’s true that I have an audience unlike others. His Majesty the Tsar will hear me speak along with the entire imperial family. I’ll be seeing the Head of Protocol about that matter this afternoon. I’ll also meet with the French ambassador. Can you imagine, Mr. Pol, speaking before the emperor is an extraordinary, formidable opportunity! I’ll try to make the most of the circumstances to get him to invite our pleasant traveling companions, who are to join the Imperial Theatre, to perform in his private theatre.”

The train had slowed and, as they saw numerous tracks and cars on either side of the train, the group realized they were approaching the station.

“We’re here!” shouted Melchior.

And, in the general hustle and bustle in the car, the actors exchanged warm, hasty handshakes with the engineer who was about to leave them. Roger Darmont clasped Mr. Pol’s arm.

The speaker hastily scribbled a few lines in pencil on his business card, then handed it to the engineer, saying, “Here’s my address in St. Petersburg. I hope to hear from you. Since you’re going to Moscow, why don’t you try to organize a little conference for me there? Tell the gentlemen in that city that I have some very interesting things to say and that I’ll come for 1000 rubles. Naturally, there will be 200 in it for you.”

Mr. Pol thanked him, laughing, and said, “I don’t handle that kind of business. But if the opportunity arises, I’ll willingly perform that service.”

Finally, the train headed into a large, glass covered hall and slowly stopped at the edge of a platform. Curious heads peaked through the door as the corridor was invaded by a series of individuals with long, blond beards and square shoulders. The station porters.

Once again, they exchanged warm farewells, promising to meet again, and then each person set out to take charge of their luggage and prepare for their imminent departure from the train and the trip to the hotel.

Mr. Pol, who was traveling with nothing more than a small suitcase, quickly obtained permission from the customs authorities to leave the station where the Nord Express had deposited him. Yet, in the station, he seemed to hesitate for a few moments, walking back and forth.

Then he said to himself, “The performers are going to the French Hotel. I must not go there.”

He dug through his pocket, took out Roger Darmont’s business card and continued, “That imbecile said he was staying at the Neva Hotel. Why shouldn’t I go there after all? The important thing is for him not to recognize me!”

So, Mr. Pol was not heading to Moscow as he had announced and was planning to stay in St. Petersburg? That was, in fact, true.

Once he had decided to stay at the Neva Hotel, he waved for a carriage, gave the address to a large, potbellied driver who understood only a few words of French and stepped into the cab.

If the driver had paid any particular attention to the passenger who had climbed into his vehicle he would have been most surprised. At the station, he had picked up a man in his fifties, face hidden behind a gray beard. Yet, when they reached the hotel, a much younger, clean-shaven man climbed out.

The man who arrived at the station ordered the door man to pay for the carriage, then headed directly to the office and asked to speak with the manager. After a few moments of conversation, the hotel manager escorted the guest personally to his room.

After settling the man in, the manager said, “Rest assured, Mr. Juve, that your privacy will be respected. I'm registering you under your real name, because that is required by law, but the personnel will know you only as the man in room 22."

That’s fine, my friend," the new arrival said.

“Don't worry. I won’t forget you, if you ever need the protection of the French embassy or myself.”

The man who had arrived in St. Petersburg in this manner, who had traveled with a fake beard, who had told everyone his name was Mr. Pol and that he was an engineer traveling to Moscow, was none other than Juve, who had taken the precaution of hiding his identity from the time he had left Paris and had firmly decided to remain in St. Petersburg!

“Would Her Imperial Highness, the Grand Duchess Ekaterina do me the honor of seeing me?”

It was four in the afternoon. Juve, who was shivering despite his cape since he had traveled a long way by sleigh, stood in front of the gate of a superb property built in the middle of a garden in the luxurious neighborhood of St. Petersburg, next to the islands.

A gigantic doorman, wearing a superb uniform, who could have been mistaken for a division general, replied to Juve’s question in French.

Shrugging, he chuckled and said, “Her Imperial Highness does not deal with peddlers and if you want to see her you will need a letter for a hearing.”

“You my dear man,” thought Juve, “You’re a

little sure of yourself. I’ll deal with you!”

Juve took a sealed letter from his pocket, threw it at the giant and said, “Take this to your mistress, moujik, and hurry because I don’t intend to spend long standing here in this snow.”

The tall giant understood Juve’s order, particularly since Juve had slipped a few rubles into the doorman’s palm. The man bowed low, stammered a bit as he looked at Juve and said, “Forgive me, Your Excellency!”

Then he ran as fast as he could, entering the property through the servants’ door.

A few minutes later, the main door to the elegant home opened. Two lackeys stepped out, walked toward Juve, and invited him bsequiously to enter the house. The policeman did not have to be asked twice. Although there was no wind outside, he was shivering, chilled by his sleigh ride. The servants took Juve’s cape, wiped the polished boots he wore and escorted him into a vast parlor where a large fire burned in the hearth.

One of the men bowed low and said, “Her Imperial Highness, the Grand Duchess Ekaterina, will be with you immediately.

“Tell her not to rush,” said Juve. “I have time.”

The policeman was most interested in the decor of the room in which he found himself. The parlor was furnished with the best of taste, in an 18th-century French style. Masterpieces hung on the walls and, with the exception of two or three minor mistakes which indicated they were in a foreign country, Juve found the elegant and distinguished influence of French taste in the home of the Russian duchess.

The policeman did not have time to observe the details of the room further. A door opened, followed by the rustling of skirts, and a woman entered. Juve bowed to her, astonished by her radiant beauty. It was the Grand Duchess Ekaterina.

Graceful, charming and simple, she walked over to the man, hand outstretched. She was smiling and looked very Parisian. With a wave of her hand, she motioned him to sit on a small sofa opposite her. She sat in a Louis IV chair that suited her fine and distinguished figure perfectly. She spoke French perfectly and talked with Juve about his trip and Paris for a few moments.

“When did you arrive, sir?” she asked.

“This very morning, Madam,” replied the policeman. “I took a brief time to settle in and then came over here immediately, at your service.”

Up to this point, the conversation had been banal and ordinary like all those conversations that take place in so many parlors around the world, in the early evening. But, suddenly, when she heard Juve say that he was at her service, the Duchess Ekaterina seemed to recall why she had summoned the policeman. She frowned, the expression in her eyes grew wild, and her cheeks turned a pale red.

Then she looked down and murmured, “I must have had absolute trust in you, Mr. Juve, to have sent you such telegram, using such clear and open language!”

Juve nodded without replying. He shared her opinion. He recalled that the telegram he had received, in which the Grand Duchess Ekaterina demanded that he come immediately to protect someone she loved more than life itself.

owever, Juve replied, “I hope that your Highness will not come to regret the trust she has shown in me. I rushed here as soon as I received her invitation, but I do wonder just how I can be of use to Your Highness since I know little about Russia, having only been here once before for a few days. Yet, I'll do my best to ensure your satisfaction, madam.”

The duchess walked over to Juve.

In a low voice, she explained, “For some time now, my existence has been no more than an existence. I’m always worried, always concerned. I’m afraid, not for myself but for the man I love. He has the most renowned, the most exposed position in the empire. He is hated by many and a good number of his predecessors have perished at the hands of fanatics. People in Russia say that when His Majesty does you the honor of appointing you to be the chief of his secret police, he is signing your death sentence. Sir, the man I love, the man who is my lover, Boris Pokroff, is the chief of the secret police. Now you understand why I constantly worry for his life, which is perpetually threatened, why I want to do everything possible to ensure that he is protected. Please tell me that you will help me?”

“You’ve used the right word,” said Juve. “I will help you. By that I mean that I will give you my full support as long as you will give me yours in return. The protection I must provide for Mr. Boris Pokroff, in order to be effective, must be secret. Even he must be unaware that I am watching over his life.”

“You may be right!" said the duchess. “But how will we proceed? He is always on his guard and if he sees anyone lurking around him the first thing Boris will do is to have that person arrested!"

“So!" continued Juve, “I will have to follow him without being seen."

“Is that possible?" asked the duchess.

Juve looked her straight in the eye for a few moments, as if trying to peer into her innermost thoughts. Then he said, “It’s possible."

“Oh!” said the duchess, dumbfounded, and then she pressed on and asked, “How will you do that? What is your plan?"

“Well," said Juve. “That’s my little secret. And since you have granted me your trust, madam, give it to me fully and allow me to act as I see fit.” Disappointment swept briefly over the face of Boris Pokroff’s mistress, but she did not insist. She was already very pleased that Juve had responded to her call. She trusted in him, knowing his reputation and skill. Despite the fact that she was a grand duchess, she would never have considered giving orders to a man such as Juve, a man who she could count on to protect the man she loved so ardently.

Juve questioned the Duchess Ekaterina for a long time, obtaining information about Boris Pokroff’s private and public life, about those around him, about his relationships. Although he asked a great many questions, Juve provided little information about himself and did not even give the duchess his address. Juve had decided to be cautious.

Was the duchess sincere or was she setting a trap for him? What did she really want with respect to Boris Pokroff?

“What a strange man this Boris Pokroff is,” Juve thought. “A police chief who needs to call on other policemen for protection.”

Once he had obtained the information he needed, Juve changed the direction of the conversation.

“Your Highness,” he said suddenly, “During your conversations with Boris Pokroff, have you heard anything about a certain mysterious matter that is upsetting the authorities of St. Petersburg?”

The duchess smiled vaguely.

“There are many matters,” she said. “Many matters that disturb the Russian police.”

“Let me be more specific,” said Juve. “Is there something about the theft of a necklace made of extremely rare diamonds and pearls that belongs to someone very highly placed in the court?”

Juve, who had only the vaguest idea about the famous treasure that was to be protected, based on what Fandor had said in his telegram, had asked the question purely by chance and was exceedingly pleased with the response to his question.

As the last words left his mouth, the Duchess Ekaterina jumped up and said, “But that’s the Tsarina’s necklace!’’

“Excuse me,” said Juve, who thought he had heard incorrectly. “What?”

The duchess continued, “The Tsarina. That’s how we refer to Her Majesty the Empress Alexandra, the emperor’s wife, the Tsarina, if you prefer.”

“Perfect!” said Juve.

The duchess asked him, “But how did you know about that? How did you hear the mysterious and secret rumors that have barely traveled beyond the walls of the imperial palace?”

Juve merely cocked his head and said, “A policeman must know everything, madam and I’m pleased that I brought up this matter since you already know about it. Can you provide a few details?”

“My God!" said the Duchess Ekaterina. “I hardly know what’s happening! The only thing I do know is that His Majesty the Tsar has informed Boris Pokroff on numerous occasions that he was concerned about the empress’s necklace. An audacious thief let people know, I have no idea how, that he intended to steal the necklace, at any cost!”

“Ah!” said Juve. “And, of course, no one knows that name of that thief.”

“Well...” the duchess said, hesitating.

“Yes?” said Juve.

“Well,” continued Ekaterina, “The bandit did not give his name, but rumor at court has it that he would be Fantomas!”

“That comes as no surprise,” Juve said calmly.

Then he asked, “Where is the empress’ necklace?”

The duchess replied, “Boris Pokroff told me that the royal family always takes it with them whenever they travel. And the Tsar and his wife travel constantly out of fear of attacks. They’re currently at Tsarskoye Selo, I presume.”

Juve interrupted, “Then that’s where the necklace must be.

It was night when Juve returned to the Neva Hotel and slipped quietly into the room he had reserved. As soon as he entered the room, his attention was caught by an envelope with a large black seal, placed in clear view on his table. Nothing was written on the envelope and Juve hesitated to open it. He called for a servant.

“Who brought this envelope here,” he asked when the servant had arrived.

“I don’t know, sir.”

“I had left instructions that no one was to enter my room,” Juve replied, tersely.

The valet protested, “I swear, sir, that no one entered your room. I never stepped out of the hallway all afternoon.”

“Fine!" said Juve, dismissing the servant.

A few minutes later, he turned the enveloped over and over with his fingertips, then suddenly broke the seal. It contained a single piece of blank paper. Juve smiled enigmatically.

“Good grief,” he said. “I should have known.”

He did not appear to be overly surprised by this strange document and simply carried it over to the radiator. Gradually, the paper contracted under the effect of the heat and writing appeared.

As he read the letter, Juve clenched his hands:

Juve, you're too late and I'm so certain of victory that I will let you know what is going on. Tomorrow evening between 11 pm and midnight, I will take the empress' necklace despite everything you might to do prevent me.

The outrageous document was signed: FANTOMAS.

Despite everything, Juve was moved and very impressed by the letter he had just received.

Fantomas seldom corresponded with Juve in ordinary times and this new technique, essentially a declaration of war, was not one commonly used by the criminal mastermind.

“What trap is he hiding?” Juve wondered.

And, purely out of a sense of contrariness, he was almost tempted to doubt the authenticity of this declaration, except for the fact that it confirmed to a certain extent the conversation he had a few hours earlier with the Duchess Ekaterina, about the necklace in question.

Juve thought about the situation for a good hour before concluding, “I have to go to Tsarskoye Selo tomorrow between 11 pm and midnight. But how will I be able to get into the heavily protected palace without revealing my identity?”

Of course, Juve could have easily obtained permission to enter the famous palace, but that would have involved revealing his position, something he did not want to do. He had to find some subterfuge to reach his goal.

“What should I do?” the policeman wondered.

Suddenly, the hand he had plunged into his pocket, to pull out a pack of cigarettes, encountered a small card, which Juve automatically pulled out. It was Roger Darmont’s business card.

“That imbecile,” Juve grumbled. “I had forgotten all about him.

He threw the card across the room, sighed and said, “That man has all the luck. He’s going to Tsarskoye Selo tomorrow! He’ll be in the palace between 11 in the morning and midnight. He won’t have any problem getting in. Whereas I...”

But Juve suddenly lost his usual calm and violently struck the table.

“What an idiot, I am!” he said, smiling. “And to think I never even considered this solution. It may be a bit brutal, but the end justifies the means!”

With that Juve rushed over to his suitcase, took out a large metal box that held make-up, wigs, and fake beards and then walked over to the washroom.

An hour later, a traveler, who had been sleeping deeply in one of the rooms in the Neva Hotel, awoke suddenly. Someone was knocking at the door.

“Who is there?” he asked, voice thick with sleep.

“Open the door,” came the reply.

The traveler, none other than the lecturer,

Roger Darmont, leapt from his bed and headed for the door, asking, “What do you want and who has sent you?”

“By the order of His Majesty the Tsar!” a voice replied.

Roger Darmont opened the door immediately.

A man stood there, wearing a large cape, and a Russian hat pulled down over his eyes. A long blond beard flowed over his chest.

The man touched the visor of his hat and said, “Get dressed immediately, sir and come with me. By the order of the Tsar.”

Roger Darmont was dumbfounded. He knew that one had to be prepared for anything when you made yourself available to the autocrats, but he was somewhat mortified that such a boor had come to wake him in the middle of the night. He attempted to question the man, but he pretended not to understand much French. When Roger Darmont was ready, the mysterious man took him by the arm.

“Let’s go down right away,” he said.

And since Roger Darmont continued to hesitate, he repeated the magical words, “By the order of the Tsar.”

They jumped into a cab and the mysterious man ordered the driver to take them to the station.

“That’s what I thought,” the lecturer thought.

“We’re obviously heading for Tsarskoye Selo.”

In vain, he attempted yet again to question the man with the blond beard, but he was a terrible brute and it was impossible to drag anything out of him.

Roger Darmont fell into a scornful, snobbish silence, promising himself that he would relate the strange tale of being roused in the middle of the night and of his even stranger trip to the Paris newspapers once he returned to France.

The coach stopped at the station, which was almost deserted at that time. Yet, a train was preparing to leave and Roger Darmont, who was pacing up and down the platform while waiting for his traveling companion to obtain tickets, learned, from reading the signs, that it was an express train heading for the German border.

“That’s not our train,” he thought.

But, to his great surprise, the man with the blond beard returned just then and invited him to enter a compartment in the train. Whenever Roger Darmont asked for explanations, the mysterious man replied, “By the order of the Tsar!”

The locomotive whistle blew. The lecturer was in the car and his traveling companion was standing on the step.

Roger Darmont lost his temper and said, “But what does all this mean? I want to know where you are taking me. You’re always talking about some order from the Tsar, but what exactly is that order?”

Then and only then the man with the blond beard took a piece of paper from his pocket. He handed it to the lecturer without saying a word.

It read:

Order of the Tsar, given to all representatives of the police of the Russian empire, to expel, as quickly as possible, outside the borders, French lecturer Roger Darmont, who harbors wicked thoughts about Their Majesties! Any resistance on the part of Roger Darmont must be met with force. Signed...

Roger Darmont was unable to read anymore.

“But that’s not true!” he shouted. “I never thought anything bad about the Tsar and the empress! I protest!”

However, as he spoke, he backed further into the car, as the man with the blonde beard took a revolver from his pocket and aimed it at him. Roger Darmont collapsed on a seat in the compartment.

“These savages are crazy!” he grumbled. “Well, they can rest assured that I will not resist. I won’t make any effort to stay here! And I fully intend to head for the border. I will only feel at ease once

I’ve left this abominable country.”

The locomotive whistle blew again and the train set off. On the station platform, the man with the blond beard watched the train for a long time, until it disappeared on the horizon. Then he slowly walked off.

“I do believe that I handled that rather well. Our man took fright and will not try to come back, at least not within the next 48 hours. That’s the important thing. I don’t need more time than that.”



CHAPTER XIV - The Diamond Necklace



It was 9:30 in the evening. Colonel Sarkov, the great chamberlain of the imperial palaces, was standing in an antechamber when he suddenly straightened up, raised a hand to his astrakhan hat, and remained perfectly motionless.

The Tsar had just entered the hallway. He was coming out of his private apartments where, after a dinner that had taken place in absolute privacy, he gone to put on the uniform of a division general.

Nicolas II was in town clothes and was wearing, with a certain amount of elegance, the dark, sober uniform of the Don Cossacks

He turned to Colonel Sarkov and asked, “Is everything ready?”

“Yes, sire!” the officer replied. “I prepared His Majesty’s sleigh and my secretaries are writing telegrams to be sent to the newspapers to confirm what has already been written up, namely that our Little Father will not attend the conference to be given this evening by the French man of letters at the Tsarskoye Selo private theatre, before the performance by the Imperial Theatre troupe.”

The Tsar looked satisfied.

“Fine,” he said. “Go and give the order to my sleigh to set out and tour the park for two hours.”

Colonel Sarkov looked surprised and said, “Your Majesty...”

But the Tsar interrupted him, “You must understand that if I make an announcement to the St. Petersburg press telling them that I am going to tour the park all night by sleigh, that’s because I have no intention of doing so. I told them that I would not be going to the theatre so that is where I will be going.”

The colonel was used to the sort of the decisions the emperor occasionally made when he was afraid, as he so often was, that he was the victim of some plot or some conspirator. Moreover, the emperor had quickly disappeared while the colonel was following his orders. He walked into a room where a few ladies in waiting waited for the empress. They all stood up when they saw the Tsar come in and curtsied deeply.

Nicolas II responded with a slight nod of his head, then waved at one of the ladies. She walked over.

“Countess,” he asked, murmuring in her ear, “Which box is reserved for me in the theatre?”

The countess replied, “As usual, I reserved the front imperial box for your Majesty. The ladies and the grand duchesses will be able to sit there.”

The emperor interrupted her, saying, “The grand duchesses can sit there on their own. I will sit alone in the gated proscenium.”

“Your wish is my command,” said the countess, bowing to the ground.

The Tsar, however, who was thoroughly familiar with all of the hallways in the palace, opened a door hidden in a wall, and entered a small room where three men were working around a table.

Nicolas II tapped one of them on the shoulder and the man leapt up.

“Michel,” the Tsar said. “Go and make sure that Colonel Sarkov ordered my sleigh to drive around the park for two hours, without stopping. Come and give me your report in the theatre.”

The man, an agent of the emperor’s secret police, immediately left the room. His two companions seemed to have heard nothing of the conversation.

As he was leaving, the Tsar called out to one of the two remaining men, saying, “Petroff, go see the countess in charge of the theatre. Instruct her to reserve the box to the left, opposite the gated proscenium, for me when I go to attend the performance in ten minutes.”

Petroff headed out and the Tsar returned to the room. Sitting next to the man who continued to work, he murmured in his ear, “What attack is being planned against me?”

No one would have recognized Boris Pokroff, the head of the secret police, in the individual, who had been working at the agents’ table. Boris

Pokroff was an expert in the art of disguise and his subordinates, when they saw him seated next to them, had no idea he was in fact their chief.

Boris smiled and said, “Your Majesty has no need for concern. There will be no attack against him. The only thing you have to worry about is the empress’ necklace, in case some audacious thief plans to steal it.”

The Tsar hesitated a moment, thinking, then said, “I want to believe you. But I advise you to pay closer attention. Don’t forget to watch over my private office, where the necklace is being kept. Also, promise to keep an eye on Michel and Petroff.”

“I trust both officers,” replied Boris.

“You can never trust anyone!" said the Tsar. “Be careful!”

He left, walked back across the hallway, where he had met Colonel Sarkov a few minutes earlier, and slowly head toward the theatre, taking an inner passageway.

He entered a type of lounge where a number of guests had gathered. Everyone fell silent when the Supreme Sovereign of all the Russias appeared. Then an absolutely beautiful woman appeared, walked over to him, curtsied and kissed his hand.

The Tsar helped her up with a friendly smile.

“Good evening, Ekaterina!” he said. “You look particularly lovely this evening. I congratulate you on your ability to remain eternally young.”

“Your Majesty, is really too kind,” said the duchess. “I’m happy that I’ve pleased you. Of course, I haven’t suffered from the passage of time much since I haven’t turned 30 yet.”

A chamberlain approached, bowed very low and asked, “Should I order the performance to start as soon as your Majesty is present?”

“Order them to start,” declared the ruler. “I’ll go to the theatre when it pleases me and I don’t want anyone to notice my presence there.”

As the chamberlain walked away, the Tsar offered his arm to his cousin the duchess and asked her, in a voice filled with emotion, “What do you want to say to me Ekaterina? You indicated that you wanted to talk with me?”

The guests left the room, entered the theatre and the curtain rose, revealing the actors who had been waiting for more than two hours for the performance to start. They had been instructed to be ready for 8:00 that evening and it was now 10:00. They were not surprised by the delay knowing full well that, in the case of performances given before sovereigns, the starting time, as well as the ending time, were determined by those who attended.

The Tsar, after hesitating, finally decided to sit in a box, renouncing his earlier plans. Nicolas

II was driven by caution and the perpetual fear that some assassin would find out where he was and attack his august person. The man, a powerful man among other powerful men, was constantly overwhelmed by the thought that he could not trust anyone and that, in order to ensure his safety, he had to have his police force continuously monitored by a counter-police force and that the counter-police had to be watched by other policemen!

As he entered the box, which he had selected at the last minute, he spoke to a tall lackey who stood in the doorway, murmuring, “Above all, don’t forget to find out what Boris, the colonel, Michel and Petroff are all up to!”

The large lackey was also a member of the Tsar’s police force and he left, to keep an eye on his colleagues, knowing full well that he too was being watched.

In the box, alone with the emperor, the duchess said, “Majesty, that policeman, Juve, has finally arrived in St. Petersburg.”

The Tsar sighed in satisfaction.

“I’m very pleased,” he said. “I have been assured that this inspector from the French Surete is very competent. And I am reassured by the thought that he may be able to support the efforts of our police force which is sorely overworked since we have been threatened by Fantomas’ sinister proclamations.”

The duchess agreed with her august cousin and said, “His Majesty can be at ease. Moreover, I have a good piece of news for him. Juve, with whom I spoke this very afternoon, is in the theatre this evening.”

“Here?” the Tsar said, surprised.

“Here,” the duchess replied.

“That’s impossible,” said the Tsar.

“May His Majesty forgive me for contradicting him, but Juve is not a boastful man. He promised me that he would attend the performance and he will certainly be here.”

The Tsar turned pale.

“So,” he stammered, “We have been betrayed if Juve is in the theatre! I checked the guest list myself. There is no one in the group of people present this evening that I do not know, at least by sight."

Maliciously, the duchess found the Tsar’s concern amusing.

“Don’t worry, your Majesty, Juve is here.”

The Tsar leaned over the edge of the box, looked through his opera glasses and grumbled, “I wager, Duchess, that Juve is not here and that he will not appear here this evening ”

The duchess did not insist. The curtain rose, revealing a table covered with a green tablecloth. The traditional glass of water stood on it. The audience waited a few minutes in silence and then burst into applause. A man in a suit had just appeared. He bowed respectfully to the audience, sat down behind the table with the green tablecloth and started to speak.

“August Majesty, Imperial Highness, ladies and gentlemen.”

They murmured his name.

It was, in fact, the lecturer, Roger Darmont.

The topic he spoke on did not want for originality and entailed no danger. He spoke about the effect growing flowers had on the public mind. And the lecturer proposed to demonstrate that the profession an individual practiced, whether rough or gentle, determined whether they would be violent or stable. He intended to conclude that if everyone set about growing flowers, all mankind would be more peaceful, gentler.

The Tsar was not listening.

Opera glasses glued to his face, he examined the faces in the theatre one by one. That task lasted took him about 20 minutes, after which, Nicolas II, satisfied with his work, turned to his neighbor and triumphantly declared, “I’ve won my bet, duchess, and I can assure you that your Juve is not here!”

The duchess was starting to lose her assurance. She too had realized that Juve was not there. She was quite vexed that she had backed the promise given by a French policeman to the Tsar. Ekaterina was also worried for herself and

for her lover. If Juve was not there, that was the first failure. Should they continue to trust in a man who had failed as of his first appearance at court? She grew anxious. Initially she had listened to the lecture with only half an ear. Yet, gradually, she took in the man’s words and seemed dumbfounded by what she heard.

“Well,” said the speaker in a voice both inspired and convinced. “What a pity it is that our wishes have not been fulfilled, that in the large empires, which serve as the keystone of the civilized world, we simply have not started growing roses. I know more than one sovereign who would benefit enormously from taking up this inoffensive and relaxing activity, while those same rulers, who settle for developing their armies, increasing their fleets, taxing their people, deserve to be called tyrants!”

As soon as the word had been uttered, a deadly, icy silence fell over the theatre. The Tsar made a motion with his hand and two enormous guards, who had been standing on either side of the stage, rushed over to the lecturer, pulled him up from his chair, and carried him backstage as the curtains fell.

The speaker had just committed a serious mistake. People in the audience murmured that he had committed treason and were concerned about the consequences his subversive comments would certainly have.

The Tsar, who had grown quite pale, turned to the duchess and said, “Truly, your Juve would have done well to have been here, if only to close that boor’s yap.”

The Tsar stood up and left the box. The duchess, who had also grown pale, followed. Suddenly the agent, Michel, appeared before the furious emperor.

“What is it?” the Tsar asked, quivering. “Have we been betrayed?”

“By all the holy images,” the agent stammered. “I swear to the Little Father that, if he has been betrayed, it was not by me and that I would deserve to be hanged a hundred times if the thought even crossed my mind.”

“So, what have you come to tell me?" asked the emperor.

“I dare not say!" Michel said.

“Speak!" Nicolas II ordered.

“Well, your Majesty," the agent said, trembling. “There’s a Juve who wants to speak with your Majesty.”

“Really!" said the Tsar. “Well have him taken to my private office."

“But that’s impossible," Michel replied.

A glance from the Tsar silenced him and the police officer turned about, a panicked expression on his face.

The crowd of guests had spread to the lounge, but not quickly enough to meet the Tsar who had returned to his private chambers and headed for his private office, still followed by the duchess. Yet, as he walked along the hallway on his way to the room where he was to meet June, he heard a great hubbub. He retreated, slipped behind a tapestry and eavesdropped.

The two guards, who had arrested the speaker, were dragging him down the hallway by his collar when Michel appeared in front of them.

“Order of the Tsar!” he declared. “Juve is to be taken to the Tsar's private office.

The guards shrugged, laughing, and said, “You’ve had too much to drink, Michel, and giving us an order you most certainly have not received could cost your dearly.”

But Michel insisted, “The Little Father ordered it. I swear!”

Then, as the guards realized that Michel was not drunk, they hesitated a second, before abruptly setting off with their prisoner once again.

The Tsar realized that they were taking the man to his office. Justifiably worried, he glanced at the duchess, who was standing nearby.

“Are you afraid, Ekaterina?” he asked.

The duchess protested, “No! I’m never afraid when I’m with your Majesty, even along the road to death...”

“We all travel that road,” the Tsar replied. “But come with me anyway.”

Agent Petroff appeared at that moment.

“Majesty!" he started. “I did what was needed.”

The Tsar interrupted him impatiently, saying, “You’re not supposed to do what’s needed. You’re supposed to handle the unexpected!”

Then he murmured in Petroff’s ear, “Petroff, I put you in charge of watching Michel who must be planning to betray me. Give me your report in an hour.”

An awful din greeted the Tsar when he entered his private office. Two guards were pummeling the unfortunate lecturer who, without retaliating, was trying to escape from their brutality.

The duchess had entered the cabinet first and as soon as he saw her, the lecturer cried out, “Madam! Please! Get these men away from me.”

When she heard that voice, the duchess trembled, turned to the emperor and said, “I beg you, Majesty, order these men out of the room and let us stay alone with this man.”

Although the duchess' request seemed odd, her tone of voice was so convincing that the Tsar ordered the two guards out.

As they left, he ran over to them and instructed, “Stay behind the door and at the slightest cry from me, grab the duchess and take her to prison.”

The Tsar turned back to his cousin. Up to this point, he had trusted her. She was perhaps one of the only people in his entourage with whom he could speak openly. But, suddenly, the Tsar was filled with terror at the idea that even his own relative might want to betray him. As a result, he had taken the precaution of ordering the officers who had brought the audacious lecturer to his cabinet, to keep a close watch.

The Tsar had accompanied the guards to the door and when he turned back, he cried out in surprise. The man standing before him was no longer the old lecturer with his curved back, limp legs, and thick beard, but a strapping, robust, clean-shaved, energetic man with a lively and sincere gaze.

The grand duchess, who was once again serene, bowed deeply and said to her cousin, “Your Majesty, allowed me to present Inspector Juve.”

Stunned, the Tsar said, “Juve! And what about the lecturer?”

“They were one and the same, Majesty,” the duchess hastened to say. “Mr. Juve has just explained to me that, in order to get into Tsarskoye Selo, this evening, he had to take the place of Roger Darmont, the lecturer you authorized to speak here.”

“What an interesting subterfuge,” the Tsar said.

Frowning, he continued, “It is obvious that Mr. Juve is not used to speaking and that his comments are so subversive they deserve an exemplary punishment!”

Humbly, Juve replied, “I sincerely apologize, your Majesty but I uttered those subversive words in order to force my arrest and interrupt both the lecture and the performance.”

“You wanted to be arrested?” shouted the emperor.

“I did, sire. Time was passing...”

“What does this mean,” asked the Tsar.

“It means that since your Majesty had been warned that Fantomas would steal the empress’ necklace which is hidden in the office, between 11:00 pm and midnight, I had to find some reason to get into the office before 11:00 pm. I’m here now and it is only 10:55.1 promise your Majesty that Fantomas will not steal the necklace if it is still in its hiding place at this moment!”

“Bravo!” shouted the Tsar. “You’ve done well, Mr. Juve and I acknowledge that you deserve to be the king of policemen.”

The emperor took the key from his pocket, opened a safe hidden in the wall. He noted with satisfaction that it contained the Tsarina’s superb necklace. He was about to close the safe when Juve intervened.

“Allow me,” he said. “Leave the safe open. In that way, we will be able to keep our eyes on the necklace until midnight.”

The duchess was satisfied with the turn the discussion had taken and addressed the Tsar, “Does your Majesty believe that we can trust in Mr. Juve’s skill, in his genius if I do say so?”

“I do,” replied the Tsar. “Moreover, the manner in which Mr. Juve obtained an audience with me was most original. I might just hire the newspapers to relate it tomorrow. That would make Fantomas think, teach him that if he continues to attack us, we will deal with him harshly.”

“Don’t do that,” said Juve.

“Is he joking?” asked the Tsar, who did not like to be contradicted.

Juve realized that and apologized, saying, “I merely meant, your Majesty, that I have a plan to present. After You Majesty hears it, you might not want to reveal anything to the press.”

“So be it,” said the Tsar. “I’m listening.”

This time, in order to show just how much he trusted Juve, the Tsar indicated to the duchess that she was to leave, and, as she was on her way, he murmured to her, “Find Colonel Sarkov and instruct him to watch over the door to my office, not the one the guards are watching, but the other one. He is to be prepared, at my call, to arrest this Juve. He may be a traitor, after all.”

That was exactly like the Tsar who constantly saw everyone in his entourage plotting against, him, planning to assassinate him, preparing to usurp his power. At Tsarskoye Selo, as in St. Petersburg, as at Peterhoff, the situation never changed. The emperor’s entourage was given secret missions and police investigations. Everyone had to be watched. Of all of the jumbled information the Tsar received, there was really nothing he gave credence to.

Juve explained in a few words, “The situation is serious, your Majesty, and I am convinced that Fantomas, who is growing exasperated by the obstacles I constantly place in his way, will do anything to attain his goal. And I will do everything to fight him, I will do the impossible to defeat him but, your Majesty, I believe that if I am to serve you well, I must remain strictly incognito. I am afraid that since I am at Tsarskoye Selo, I may be recognized by Fantomas, since he is certainly here as well. Your Majesty, I am sure that you agree that you must announce that you have expelled the lecturer.”

“That’s right,” said the Tsar. “I think the same as you do, Juve, but will people really believe that I have expelled the lecturer?”

Juve was about to respond when there was a discreet knock at the door. At the order of the Tsar, the policeman hid behind a curtain. Colonel Sarkov entered.

“May your Majesty forgive me for interrupting,” he said. “I have received a telegram from the personal service of the imperial cabinet which no one understands...”

“Hand it over!” said the Tsar.

Nicolas II read the telegram, made no comment, and merely waved the colonel out of the room. Once Sarkov had left, the Tsar called Juve.

“Read this telegram,” the Tsar said.

Juve read it and could not keep from smiling. It was an outraged protest, sent from Berlin by Roger Darmont, the real one, complaining that he had been rudely chased out of Russia for no good reason.

Seeing that Juve was smiling, the Tsar questioned him.

The policeman replied, “Everything is fine, your Majesty. I must admit that I am the one who chased Roger Darmont from the empire.

Then he told the Tsar how he had chased the lecturer away, since it was Juve, in fact, who, in order to take the speaker’s place and get into Tsarskoye Selo, had gone to Roger Darmont’s room the previous evening, disguised as a Russian police office, and forced him to take the first train leaving the empire.

“This telegram is excellent,” Juve shouted. “All we have to do is confuse the dates, and publish only the telegram tomorrow evening and Fantomas himself, if he thinks I’m here this evening, will be convinced that I have been expelled from the empire.”

“So be it," said Nicolas II. I’m starting to understand your goal... you want no one to know you are in the imperial palace. You can count on me to do everything possible to see that is so.”

Juve bowed respectfully. Obviously, things were going as well as possible and he hoped he could kill two birds with one stone. He had to guard the empress’ necklace while also protecting that Boris Pokroff, the duchess’ lover, in order to keep the promise the French policeman had made to that grand Russian lady.

Juve obtained permission from the Tsar to spend the entire night in the cabinet.

“Tomorrow, however!" he said to the Russian emperor, “I will ask your Majesty to have me replaced since I have another mission to perform, for which I will need your august assistance.”

“Of course,” replied the emperor. “Tomorrow morning, I will have Boris Pokroff replace you!”

“Boris Pokroff I” Juve murmured, a mysterious gleam in his eye.



CHAPTER XV - Old Riga



All was quiet in the imperial palace. The hours passed, slowly, silently, monotonously, that night. Juve, in keeping with the promise he had given the Tsar, kept watch in the darkness, in the emperor’s small work study, keeping the chest containing the necklace close at hand.

The police officer was both satisfied and vexed. He had completed a good portion of his program; he had met Fantomas’ challenge with triumph, with victory.

Fantomas had, in fact, been so daring as to inform Juve that, despite the precautions the policeman might take, the empress' necklace would disappear between 11:00 pm and midnight. Juve, however, had arranged to save the necklace. From time to time, using a flashlight, the policeman would check on the precious item. And as he looked at it he understood why Fantomas was interested in taking it. It was, in fact, a remarkably beautiful piece, a magnificent necklace worthy of an empress. The pearls and diamonds were set in platinum and gold mounts. In addition to the value of the gems, there was also the historic worth of the necklace since a large number of the stones had both a name and a history. The necklace was certainly worth a fortune and that would have been enough for Fantomas to want it.

Juve had managed to prevent Fantomas from putting his plans into in action. The policeman, who had been mysteriously summoned by Fandor, had been able, within less than 12 hours, to get a personal audience with the Tsar and earn his trust. Moreover, Juve had assured the sympathies of the Duchess Ekaterina, who spoke with authority at the court. He had worked skillfully, all the more so since he was adventuring into terrain that was unfamiliar to him, working almost blindly, knowing full well that he could be discovered and unmasked and was unaware of where his enemies and adversaries were hiding.

Even better, Juve, who had been drawn to Russia by Fandor’s appeal, had had no news of the latter and did not know where he could be reached. Finally, although the policeman had been informed that Fantomas was in St. Petersburg, he was displeased by the fact that the people that denounced Fantomas were the same people he was tempted to consider a formidable adversaries and dangerous enemies, since Fantomas had been denounced by the nihilists.

Juve thought about all these things as the night passed. He decided that he would not be upset, the next morning, to make the acquaintance of the man the Tsar had designated to take his place guarding the necklace. He had heard the man’s name. His Imperial Majesty had said that Juve’s successor in the small office where the treasure was locked up would be Boris Pokroff.

But who was the man? What role did he play at the imperial court? That’s what Juve did not know.

In principle, it appeared that the chief of the Tsar’s secret police would be a man above all suspicion. Juve had barely seen him in the hallways of the theatre and was barely able to hold onto the opinion he had forged. But Boris Pokroff had made a bad impression on Juve and, despite himself, the policeman felt that he should not trust the man.

Was that instinct talking? Juve could not have said. When he thought of Pokroff, if someone had told him that the man was none other than one of Fantomas’ accomplices or even Fantomas himself, he would not have been that surprised.

In any event, Juve waited impatiently, for the time when Boris Pokroff was supposed to come and get him.

He no longer thought that Pokroff had to be unaware of his presence at the palace or that Juve had promised the duchess to watch over Pokroff in secret and protect him, without the other man’s knowledge, against the numerous murder threats that, in Russia, always hung heavily over a highly-placed police chief.

Of course, following the evening’s events, Juve was not thinking about that detail, but someone was and that person was the Duchess Ekaterina.

When morning came, when it was time for Juve to retire, someone, accompanied by a group of Cossacks, showed up at the entrance to the imperial office. That person knocked discreetly four times, as agreed. Juve leapt up.

“Finally,” he said. “I am going to see this Boris Pokroff and we will have a chance to talk.”

He rushed over to open the door, but when he saw the individual standing there, he was greatly disappointed. It was not the chief of the secret police, but the brave colonel Sarkov, in full dress uniform. He seemed to be quite pleased with the mission he had been assigned. He did not seem to know Juve by name, but he had no doubt been told that he was a policeman since he greeted him respectfully, with the instinctive sympathy given to those are in the good graces of sovereigns.

And, in order to exonerate himself in advance from any accusations that could be made against him in the future, Colonel Sarkov said to Juve, “By assigning me to watch over the empress’ necklace, he does me a great honor and proves that he believes in me. His Majesty is right. Anyone who would attempt to take the piece without a written order from my masters will have to do so over my dead body and those of my Cossacks.”

Juve took his leave of the courageous military man and, finding himself in the hallway, met a chamberlain and two servants who walked him through the palace for 30 minutes and took him into a small room at the very top of the castle. There they invited him to get some rest.

Juve could not ask for more. He was very pleased to have an opportunity to sleep.

Yet, as he lay down, Juve wondered, “Why didn’t Boris Pokroff come to replace me, as we had agreed last evening?”

If Juve was asking a question like that, it meant he was not taking the Duchess Ekaterina into account. She had witnessed the events of the previous evening and had clearly heard the emperor declare that Juve would be replaced by Boris Pokroff.

“And the minute that happens!" the duchess told herself, “Juve and Boris will meet and my lover will immediately know that if the French policeman is in the palace it is because I summoned him, to protect him. He will be vexed and my goal will not be achieved.”

The duchess cleverly convinced the Tsar to give a counter order. And, at about three o’clock in the morning, His Imperial Majesty had a message taken to Colonel Sarkov, informing the man that he was assigned to the mission previously give to the police chief.

Once that order was given, the duchess had retired. She had taken care to call her lover and was overjoyed to find him at her home when she arrived there. They took part in a tender demonstration of their love that lasted until dawn.

However, while the duchess slept, Boris Pokroff, or should we say Fantomas, who lay next to her without sleeping, kept watch, worried. For the last 48 hours, the terrible bandit felt as if he had been walking on top of a volcano and that singular, mysterious events were taking place all around him, one after another.

Fantomas had absolute trust in his mistress, the Duchess Ekaterina. He did not suspect that she had summoned Juve to St. Petersburg and, even if he had known about her telegram asking the policeman to come, he would have understood her purpose and would not have been angry.

But Fantomas knew nothing of all that, since the duchess had discreetly not wanted to inform her lover that she was having him watched for his own protection.

Fantomas, however, had learned about Juve’s arrival in Russia through the reports he received from the secret police. He had quickly set out to find where the policeman was staying in St.

Petersburg and, out of bravado and convinced that he was the better man, he had sent Juve a challenge. Yet, Fantomas was unable to gloat as he had planned. The incidents of the evening had prevented him from taking the necklace.

Fantomas had not seen Juve in the lecturer, but he had no doubt that the policeman was not far. He had to act quickly, or his reputation as a criminal mastermind would be tarnished. It was important for Fantomas to savor victory, if only to prove to Juve that Fantomas was always the stronger of the two.

Dawn had barely arrived and Fantomas, who was not sleeping, was developing the most extraordinary plans in his mind, when the telephone suddenly rang, breaking the intimate and discreet silence of the bedroom where he was resting next to his beautiful mistress.

The so-called chief of the secret police picked up the telephone on the bedside table. The call was from his valet, who knew where Boris Pokroff was spending the night.

Fantomas leapt up. He was to come to the imperial palace immediately to confer with the empress herself. This was the first time that the chief of the secret police had received such an order. The empress did not usually get involved in police business and, above all, it was the first time she had expressed a desire to speak directly with him.

Fantomas did not hesitate to obey. He informed his mistress, in a few words, of the empress’ wishes and dressed quickly. An hour later Fantomas was at Tsarskoye Selo.

His car had taken him to an interior court that provided access to the private apartments of the Tsarina. He was received by a group of giants dressed in red, standing on the steps of a marble staircase, armed to the teeth, ready to pounce on anyone who appeared suspicious.

Fantomas, who played the role he had usurped as the police chief quite successfully, still experienced palpitations from time to time, particularly since he knew Juve was in St. Petersburg. He was constantly worried. Was he about to be suddenly surprised? Unmasked? Would the giants in red, who respectfully made way for him, receive a sudden order to arrest him? That’s what Fantomas did not know. Why had the empress asked for him? What was she going to say to him? Who would be there? He was convinced that the empress would not talk directly with him.

In that respect, Fantomas was wrong.

He reached the top of the marble staircase and, although it was only seven in the morning, a lady waited for him, fully dressed. She walked over and curtsied. Fantomas bowed in return.

This woman, one of the empress’ senior ladies in waiting, asked, “Do I have the honor of addressing Mr. Boris Pokroff, the chief of Their Majesties’ secret police?”

“Himself,” Fantomas replied.

“Please follow me,” she said.

Fantomas obeyed and, for a good 20 minutes, walked without interruption through the hallways and secret chambers of the portion of the palace reserved for the empress. Finally, the lady in waiting stopped in a sort of small lounge filled with extraordinary, gilded furniture, where the walls were completely covered with white bear skins. The room was empty. Fantomas was invited to wait there. He was alone for 10 minutes, after which a door opened and the empress appeared.

The Tsarina was dressed very simply that day and wore a light-colored morning dress, decorated with English lace. Her hair was styled in the Russian manner into a halo around her head, ready for the imperial crown. The low neck on her morning dress revealed the harmonious and pure lines of her neck. Yet, what struck Fantomas was the fact that the empress was wearing the famous necklace that had been so carefully guarded.

Fantomas bowed to her, placing one knee on the floor.

The empress signaled that he was to stand up and said, in a voice that was as harmonious and gentle as her husband’s was nervous and strained,

“Sir, I’ve had you brought here to give me some advice.”

“Your Majesty,” said Fantomas,” You do me a great honor...”

The empress interrupted him, smiling as she said, “Advice that I will follow if that suits me.”

Then, changing tone, she suddenly said, “I had this necklace which I am wearing taken from the safe about 15 minutes ago. It is the object of such covetousness that the very presence of this necklace in the imperial palace represents a danger, in my opinion, for my husband the emperor. Although I do not want to get rid of this item which belongs more to the history of the imperial family than myself and yet, this necklace fills me with horror and dread. Mr. Boris Pokroff, please advise me and suggest a plan for keeping this necklace while ensuring the safety of my husband and children.”

Fantomas bowed and declared, ironically, “Where, Majesty, could the necklace be safer than on your august person? I’m certain that no one would dare...”

Smiling sadly, the empress said, “I know that Fantomas covets this necklace. His reputation is so great that I have been assured that not only does he always get what he wants but that there is no one in the world so sacred that he would not hesitate to strike if he felt the need.”

“That’s right,” thought Fantomas who, finding himself alone with the empress wondered if he should simply throw himself at her, grab the necklace and run off without any further ado. But, as he imagined that hypothesis, he considered the giants in red, standing on each step of the marble staircase. Plus, a new idea was germinating in his mind.

Unsuspecting, the empress, as she had asked him the question, had made the sinister bandit think of a way in which he could make off with the necklace.

Adopting a humble expression, Fantomas suggested, “Your Majesty will not be able to keep the necklace without risking great danger.

A bandit like Fantomas would not hesitate, to place his sacrilegious hands on a sovereign’s shoulders. Therefore, Majesty, you must abandon the necklace, which will never be safe in the emperor’s private office, and give it to someone else, turning Fantomas’ attention away from you and toward that other person. Moreover, if that person dies he will only have done his duty and there will be 1,000 others like him willing to fill that perilous position.”

The empress appeared touched by this chivalrous language and asked the man she thought to be Boris Pokroff, "Who, in your opinion is the man who is noble enough, courageous enough to take charge of this necklace, who would protect it and defend it, at the risk of losing his life?"

The man pretending to be Boris bowed once again and said, “If it pleases your Majesty to give me this necklace, I will fulfill the mission in question. I own a property in Gatchina and I ask your permission to go there for a few days. I will leave this afternoon. If your Majesty entrusts me with the necklace, I assure you that it will remain in my possession as long as I live.”

The empress held her delicate white hand out to Fantomas and said, “I trust you Boris Pokroff! And once my august husband has authorized me to do so, I will give you the necklace that could well be fatal for us in a most conspicuous manner.”

The empress appeared to be reassured and was smiling as she left the room. Fantomas smiled as well as he left, but there was something dreadful about his expression.

It had been agreed that the necklace would be given to Fantomas at three in the afternoon and it was barely eight in the morning. The bandit, whom everyone thought was Boris Pokroff, left the empress’ private chambers without any problems, returned to his vehicle and was immediately driven to his offices in St. Petersburg.

He spent an hour there studying the urgent files, ordering a few random arrests, demonstrating unexpected leniency toward certain criminals, after which Fantomas went into a private room and completely changed the style of his beard and hair, replaced his elegant clothing with miserable rags and left on foot, taking a secret passageway.

Fantomas jumped into a rental cab and was driven for about 15 minutes, until his vehicle stopped at the entrance to a narrow, repellant alley, surface covered with waste, bordered by tumbledown dwellings. Children played noisily in the dead-end street, which never saw the light of day and was perpetually cold, causing people to say that it knew only one season: winter.

Fantomas seemed perfectly at home in this type of miserable neighborhood. He noticed an old woman sitting on a stone doorstep, face blotchy, blood-shot eyes, wrapped in bags, old furs and animal skins.

Fantomas bent over the old woman and asked, “Is your brother home?”

A quiet groan escaped from the old woman’s bluish lips. It could have been interpreted in any way but since, it is easy to believe what one wants and Fantomas wanted to meet the brother of that wreck, he understood that the brother was at home. Fantomas went inside, not without first covering his nose with a handkerchief, as protection against the nauseating smell.

He walked up a poor and miserable staircase with slippery, broken steps, filled with the odor of hot grease and filth. Despite the repugnant horror of the shanty, Fantomas climbed up to the second floor, the top of the house, and kicked in a worm-eaten door. He found himself in an attic with a skylight, broken panes replaced by pieces of cardboard long ago. The inside of the attic seemed surprising, strange, like the shop of an old-fashioned alchemist. The rotting tables, stools and shelves were covered with all kinds of flasks. An odd liquid simmered on a cast-iron stove, giving off bitter steam while blue and pink salts melted in boiling water on the floor, crackling without cease.

In the back of the attic, a pale, old man with sunken eyes and a beard that had once been white but was yellow in places and black in others, lay huddled on a bed of straw. The man’s eyes seemed to be the only part him showing any sign of life. He looked at Fantomas as he entered and, in a broken voice said, “Who are you brother? And why are you bothering an old man who is biding his time until he descends into his grave and samples the unspeakable joys of the eternal void?”

“Enough,” said Fantomas. “Don’t play games with me Riga, I need you.”

The old man immediately stopped whining. He got up with a surprising agility for a man of his age and stammered, “Pardon me, Boris Pokroff. I didn’t recognize you. Of course, you’re good with disguises.”

“That’s my trade,” Fantomas said, coldly.

He considered the old man and said, “You scoundrel, despite the grace I have shown you and the fact that you served only 15 years of a 30-year sentence, I imagine you’re just as unrepentant as ever and that the nihilists have no one better to keep them supplied with bombs than you?”

The old man grew pale and fell to his knees, saying, “By the Holy Images and in the holy and sacred name of Maria Alexandra Federovna the august wife of our Little Father, I swear, Boris Pokroff that I no longer work for anyone and I don’t even know how to make a bomb!’

“Ah,” said the supposed chief of the secret police, disappointed, “That’s really too bad because, my dear Riga, I have an excellent opportunity for you to earn a half-dozen rubles.”

The old man, still on his knees, clasped his hands and stammered, “Virgin Mary! If what you say is true, Boris Pokroff, I want my memory to come back to me. Miracles do happen, you know.”

“They do, my good man, they do,” replied Fantomas. “And I’ll give you five minutes to reach an agreement with Paradise. And if you still don’t recall how to make bombs after that time, I will

The old man immediately stopped whining. He got up with a surprising agility for a man of his age and stammered, “Pardon me, Boris Pokroff. I didn’t recognize you. Of course, you’re good with disguises.”

“That’s my trade,” Fantomas said, coldly.

He considered the old man and said, “You scoundrel, despite the grace I have shown you and the fact that you served only 15 years of a 30-year sentence, I imagine you’re just as unrepentant as ever and that the nihilists have no one better to keep them supplied with bombs than you?”

The old man grew pale and fell to his knees, saying, “By the Holy Images and in the holy and sacred name of Maria Alexandra Federovna the august wife of our Little Father, I swear, Boris Pokroff that I no longer work for anyone and I don’t even know how to make a bomb!’

“Ah,” said the supposed chief of the secret police, disappointed, “That’s really too bad because, my dear Riga, I have an excellent opportunity for you to earn a half-dozen rubles.”

The old man, still on his knees, clasped his hands and stammered, “Virgin Mary! If what you say is true, Boris Pokroff, I want my memory to come back to me. Miracles do happen, you know.”

“They do, my good man, they do,” replied Fantomas. “And I’ll give you five minutes to reach an agreement with Paradise. And if you still don’t recall how to make bombs after that time, I will go back to the police station and send a dozen officers who will remind you about the joys of the knout!”

“Sir,” the old man said, trembling. “I feel something coming back. The Holy Virgin is inspiring me and in a few minutes I will remember how to make one of those time bombs a brother nihilist wanted just the other day.”

Fantomas frowned and tapped his foot.

“Hurry up he said and stop this nonsense. I'm not in the mood.”

Who was this strange old man and what was Fantomas’ business with him?

Since he had replaced the real Boris Pokroff and gone unpunished for that crime, Fantomas had taken the place of the chief of the secret police and had been studying the files on all kinds of people. Fantomas decided to make good use of the information available to him and, in order to ensure that he had sympathizers in all camps and to avoid betrayal, he had punished or pardoned at random, liberating criminals and incarcerating the innocent. In fact, he had suddenly ordered an extremely dangerous nihilist, who had been sentenced to death on five occasions and mysteriously pardoned five times, a man Fantomas had finally found in a prison where he had spent 15 years, at the age of 80 years old with 15 years left to serve, he had ordered him to be released.

Fantomas had released the old bandit from prison in exchange for his services.

The old man, terrified of the supposed chief of the secret police, had promised to do everything he was asked and he left prison to return to his shack, back to his explosives and flasks, since he actually was a chemist.

Fantomas quickly realized that he had been wrong to liberate the old man in exchange for the information he could provide. Old Riga no longer had any contacts with the nihilists and could not inform Fantomas about what they were up to. Moreover, since he had been pardoned repeatedly, his former comrades no longer trusted him and Riga, plunged into the darkest misery, abandoned by the nihilists who suspected him and the police he provided no information to, almost regretted giving up the room and board he had enjoyed in the prison hospital.

Boris Pokroff’s visit and the promise he had made represented an unexpected blessing and Riga stopped playing his games and asked, “Boris Pokroff, what do you want me to do? Give me your orders?”

“It’s quite simple,” said Fantomas. “I’m in a real rush. I need a bomb for three o’clock today to blow up the police chief’s car.”

“Excuse me,” said the old man. I’m a bit hard of hearing and my mind is not what it used to be. If I’m not mistaken, you’re asking me to make a bomb to blow up the police chief’s car? But you’re the police chief?”

“I am,” said the supposed Boris Pokroff. “And I want to blow up my car.”

“You’re being fired? Replaced?” the old man asked.

“I’m still the chief of Their Majesties secret police!" said Fantomas.

For a few minutes, old Riga looked at him, dumbfounded, then the light suddenly came into his eyes. He chortled, nodded his head, and said, “Now I understand! You want a bomb, Boris Pokroff, to blow up your car, without you getting hurt. A fake attack. You will make the most of the inoffensive explosive to arrest some of my former brothers and throw them into prison. In other words, nothing has changed and those miserable police officers are still stirring everything up.”

The old man grew animated as he spoke. All of the hatred he had accumulated throughout his entire life burst out in his bitter words. He clenched his hands and his eyes blazed.

The supposed Boris Pokroff interrupted him, in a harsh voice, saying, “Come on, you scoundrel. No one asked you your opinion. I’m just ordering you to obey. I will do as I please once the carriage has blown up. Meanwhile, make your bomb and give me the information I need to blow it up when I want to. I want the car to blow up and I don’t want to get hurt as I’m sitting in the back seat.”

The old man did not reply. But he had got up from his pallet and walked over to a table where a few pages of yellowed paper lay. He took a pencil out of a pocket and drew the outline of the police chief’s vehicle on it. He knew it well; it was after all quite famous in St. Petersburg. An old-fashioned looking carriage, armored, driven by a coachman sitting on a raised bench, drawn by four horses. He showed the drawing to Fantomas.

“That’s your vehicle,” he asked.

“That’s it,” replied Boris Pokroff.

Old Riga pointed at a spot, next to the front springs, with the tip of his pencil.

“That’s where you have to place the bomb that I’ll give you in a bit. Be warned, though, that the explosion will be violent. Plus, in order to make the attack look real, the explosion will have to cost the lives of at least two horses and the coachman, and maybe even three or four people nearby?

That's not a problem,” said Fantomas. “People have to believe that I have been the victim of an attack, a serious attack.”

For another hour, the two men spoke. Then, after all of the conditions were met, the old man got down to work. Under Fantomas’ watchful eye, he prepared his explosives. It was noon when the bandit left the hovel, carrying everything he needed to blow up half the imperial palace if that was what he wanted. What were Fantomas’ plans? Why did he want people to believe an attack was planned against him?



CHAPTER XVI - The Recalcitrant Coachman



While Fantomas was hatching this shadowy plan which, if it succeeded, would deliver the empress’ necklace into his hands once and for all while making everyone believe that he had risked his life to defend it, the Duchess Ekaterina, who had requested a private audience, had been received in the greatest secret by the emperor and the empress.

Obviously, she wanted something strange and surprising from them, since the interview lasted a long time, much longer than usual in the case of a conversation amons members of the imperial family, whose time is counted and who work so hard, day and night, to manage State affairs.

After 20 minutes, however, the duchess left the sovereigns and returned to her carriage with a triumphant air. She had the driver take her to the station, where a train was preparing to set out for a country estate in the outlying areas of St. Petersburg, which she shared with her lover. The duchess had barely sat down when she smiled with satisfaction and nattered out loud.

“My God! Thank you for suggesting that marvelous idea to the emperor. In this way, Boris Pokroff will be under the constant protection of the subtlest policeman in the world and he won’t suspect a thing.”

Following the conversation with the duchess, the emperor and empress had remained alone for a short while.

The Tsar looked at his wife, shrugged and said, “That duchess is growing more and more romantic. Now she’s worried about the life of our friend Pokroff and she wants that policeman Juve to protect him. I don’t see anything inconvenient in that, but there must be something more to it!”

The Tsar could hardly suspect what that something else could be since he was unaware of the private, romantic intrigues of those in his entourage. The Tsarina, on the other hand, often received confidences from the family princesses. People knew that, given her generous and discreet nature, they could confide in her fully. As a result, she was well informed about a number of romantic secrets and knew who was seeing whom and what was always going on among those who lived in the palace. Discreet as always, the Tsarina did not inform her august husband about why the Duchess Ekaterina was being so solicitous with respect to Boris Pokroff.

The emperor had orders to give and was about to leave. Before going her own way, the empress said to him, “Sire, don’t forget that, within a few hours I must make a great show of giving the necklace which has set so many tongues wagging to the chief of the secret police and that Boris Pokroff must leave with the necklace, in formal attire, to go to his estate in Gatchina, where he will keep it securely and that he will be the official guardian of the crown jewels from now on.”

“Madam,” replied the Tsar, “You want me to let everyone know about Boris Pokroff’s chivalrous decision?”

The Tsarina replied, “Personally, I find paying so much attention to the departure of our generous servant is dangerous for him but, with your approval, I will not hesitate to do so knowing full well that is Boris Pokroff’s wish.”

The Tsar smiled bitterly and replied, “All I have to do, madam, is utter a few words about the matter in the corridor we are about to walk down, where the courtiers are gathering. In order to make sure the news spreads like wildfire, I’ll pretend to tell you about it in a confidential manner. After all, there is no shortage of spies and traitors at court!”

The empress did not dare contradict her husband. No one knew better than she did about the weaknesses of her entourage.

The emperor did as he had said. While the courtiers bowed low and the yeomen preceded him, he bent his head close to the empress and murmured, “I wish to inform you, madam, that in order to eliminate all danger from the Tsarskoye Selo, Boris Pokroff, the dedicated chief of our secret police, has decided to take the historic necklace to his estate in Gatchina, this very day and keep it there until he receives new orders.”

Less than an hour after the Tsar had uttered these words, the entire city of St. Petersburg had been informed about the upcoming trip of the chief of police. Moreover, when Boris Pokroff had returned to the palace, he’d decided it was necessary to prepare for his trip with a great deal of show and pomp. He had scolded all of the palace staff, sent the Cossacks throughout the royal residence, given contradictory orders and he had done this so effectively that, when it came time for him to set out for his estate in Gatchina, most of the courtiers and the palace staff had gathered either in the courtyard or at the palace windows to see the chief of the secret police leave with the crown jewels, the necklace that everyone rightfully considered one of the most valuable items in the imperial treasury. Furthermore, the necklace was turned over to the police chief with a certain amount of ceremony. The steward of the imperial palace, wearing his dress uniform, had handed the necklace over, in the presence of both the emperor and the empress, to Boris Pokroff, who had signed a receipt for it.

It was a curious ceremony since it involved moving the object coveted by the audacious bandit known as Fantomas, in order to keep it out of the hands of the renowned criminal mastermind. Someone who seemed upset, very emotional during that ceremony was Boris Pokroff, namely Fantomas himself... When he received the priceless necklace from the steward, his hands shook and it seemed as if it would take little for Fantomas to tear off his mask and race off, carrying off the necklace that had been given to him with so much trust.

But Fantomas would never throw caution to the wind like that. Having the necklace was not enough. He had to be able to keep it. He must never be suspected of having stolen it so that he could do with it as pleased afterwards, selling as he wished.

Fantomas had pulled off a stroke of mastery by having the item he planned to steal voluntarily handed over to him. But, this was by no means the end of the matter. Quite the contrary. He had to be able to keep it without being accused of stealing it, by making it seem as if someone else had stolen it...

Of course, Fantomas was far from winning the game, but he was so satisfied with this initial success, so pleased that he had the magnificent treasure in his hands, that, once the ceremony had been completed, he could not keep from racing over to the armored carriage that waited for him at the palace gate, jumping into it and locking the door. The vehicle immediately set off at a gallop, crossing through the gardens of Tsarskoye Selo and, once the magnificent avenues that surrounded the imperial residence lay behind it, the carriage headed for Gatchina.

Once the carriage had disappeared, the Tsar turned to the empress and murmured, “May God keep him and the treasure! And I hope that he will feel a little calmer. Did you notice, madam, that Boris Pokroff seemed a little emotional? As he climbed into the carriage, he didn’t even notice the royal gift I gave him!”

The empress, always willing to see the best in others, replied, “You must forgive him, sire, for that involuntary inconvenience. I’m certain that Boris Pokroff is so preoccupied with his mission that nothing could take his attention from that!”

Fantomas hunkered down in his armored carriage, clasping the priceless treasure that the Tsar and Tsarina had given to him to his chest. The sinister bandit chuckled as his carriage raced through the busy streets.

“Obviously,” he said to himself, “My imagination always comes up with wonderful plans and if my friend Juve learns what I’ve done to get my hands on this necklace, he will most certainly die of shock. Of course, he would never expect to see Fantomas disguised as the chief of the secret police of an empire such as Russia!”

But, after admiring his own skill, Fantomas thought about the course he should take, saying, “This is not the end, only the beginning.”

And, with a certain amount of emotion, he looked at his feet, at a small wire that poked through the floor and trembled with the movements of the carriage on the pavement. Fantomas knew that all he had to do was pull on that little wire sharply to explode the bomb manufactured by Old Riga. The master criminal had attached that bomb himself to the front of the carriage. It had been arranged so that it would explode toward the horses, which would be pulverized, along with the driver. But Fantomas, positioned in the armored portion of the car, would be unhurt.

The faked attack would have two benefits for Fantomas. Not only would it be easy to blame the nihilists for assassinating him and making the most of the confusion caused by the explosion to steal the necklace, but Fantomas could also conduct investigations intended to cast suspicious on the nihilists, arresting and executing many of them without judgments.

Showing no sign of gratitude to Old Riga for supplying the bomb, Fantomas decided that the old man would be among the first to be arrested and that, in order to ensure his silence, he would have him shot on the pretext that he was fomenting rebellion, the first chance he got, without even charging him.

Fantomas looked out the window at the route they were taking. They were approaching a square surrounded by a group of modest houses occupied by workers and ordinary people.

“A real neighborhood for nihilists!" Fantomas said to himself, looking with disgust and scorn at the dumpy houses that stood on either side of the winding alleys as his carriage drove by.

After catching sight of the square that stood about 150 yards away, Fantomas made up his mind.

“That’s where I’ll pull the wire. That’s where the bomb will go off... And as soon as that is done, I will pretend to escape as if seriously injured and people will run over to look at my carriage. Later I’ll tell the newspapers that, after a fierce struggle, the empress’ necklace was taken from the courageous Boris Pokroff following a fierce battle by a gang of frenzied nihilists headed by a masked man, which the chief of police clearly recognized as Fantomas!”

The sinister bandit had barely worked out this plan when his carriage, skillfully driven by an enormous coachman, headed into the square. There was a large crowd there, since it was a fair day, and several large tents had been set up on the road.

Fantomas thought, “It’s almost as if the Bohemians had gathered here specifically for me!”

Abruptly, Fantomas pulled the wire and immediately hunkered down in the back of the carriage, covering his face with his arms, waiting for the explosion. The coachman had been obliged to slow on his way through the crowd. Fantomas counted the seconds... To his great surprise, there was no explosion!

“Now, now, now,” thought the bandit. “It just isn't possible that the bomb has not gone off.”

But nothing out of the usual occurred. Fantomas would have to pull the wire a second time in an effort to set off the bomb. Nervously, yet vigorously, he grasped the end of the wire in his robust fingers and pulled until it felt as if the wire would break. He released it and once again hunkered down in the back of the carriage.

“This time...” he thought.

Fantomas remained in that position for a few moments, a few seconds, a few minutes. The carriage had left behind the square long ago, driven through the suburbs and was heading into an immense white plain on the roughly paved road that led to Gatchina. And the carriage continued to drive on and the horses continued to gallop driven by the coachman’s whip. And the bomb did not explode! Fantomas sat up. Clasping his chin, he thought, attempting to understand what was happening, to figure out why the bomb had not detonated.

“Yet I planned things well,” the bandit said to himself.

His face grew very pale as large drops of cold sweat pearled on his forehead and Fantomas hammered his knee with his fist.

“Damnation!” he grumbled.

An atrocious thought had just slipped into his mind. Fantomas felt as if he were suffocating, as he crossed his arms over his chest.

“I’m an imbecile,” he proclaimed in desperation. “I’m as naive as a child and more simple minded that a moujik! Obviously, that old scoundrel Riga has tricked me and this may very well be my final hour.”

In fact, Fantomas was thinking that the old man he had ordered to make the bomb, despite his apparent sympathy and acknowledgement, had suddenly decided to kill him. Fantomas believed that Riga had made a device that would explode when he thought fit and that all of the information he had given the apparent chief of police about how to set off the bomb when he wanted to were inaccurate.

“I’ve been had... I’ve been had...” grumbled Fantomas, adding, “I have no problem dying if I do so at the hands of worthy adversaries. But what I can’t stand is the idea of dying for no good reason after being taken in by an old nihilist. The entire world will laugh at me. Juve will be wild with joy... No, no, no! I’ll do everything possible to avoid such as stupid death."

He broke through the small square of wood that separated the coachman’s bench from the interior of the carriage and shouted, “Nick! Nick! Good old Nick! Stop right now. I have to get out!”

Nick was the name of the coachman who usually drove the armored carriage of the chief of police. Nick was in fact a former security agent who had grown so corpulent as he grew older that he was no longer able to work as a police officer but was perfectly capable of serving, with honor and dignity, as a coachman for an almost official vehicle. Nick was completely dedicated to his master, obeying him like a dog. However, Nick barely knew that very master by sight. For the six years, he had been in his service, he had only seen him face to face three or four times and, of course, he would have been one of the many who would have been unable to distinguish the real Boris Pokroff, now dead, from the murderer who had replaced him. Fantomas.

But fat Nick did not need to be able to recognize people in order to serve them with great dedication. He was under the orders of the chief of police and if the man had ordered him to throw himself into the Baltic Sea with his carriage and horse, he would have done so without blinking, without hesitating. 

Fantomas did not know how dedicated his servant was, but he had had an opportunity, on several occasions while playing the role of Boris Pokroff, to test the driver’s devotion.

So Fantomas was stunned, dumbfounded when he realized, after repeating his order twice, that the coachman was not obeying him. There was no way he could not have been heard. Fantomas had shrieked.

But, when he had heard Fantomas shout, “Stop right now!” Nick had whipped the horses into a gallop. The carriage tossed about on the rough road that leads to Gatchina. On both sides of the road lay a white plain, the immense white steppe. And Fantomas suddenly felt as if he had fallen into a trap and would most certainly have to work very hard to save his hide.

Was it deliberate or an unfortunate coincidence? He did not know, but one thing was certain, contrary to the orders he had been given, instead of slowing the carriage Nick was urging his horses on, faster and faster.

Fantomas grew more and more certain that he had not only been trick but even worse, betrayed by old Riga, but that he had no control over the bomb made by the old nihilist and it would explode sometime, anytime, tearing the horses, the coachman, the carriage and even Fantomas into a million bits. The criminal clenched his hands and fumed, but he felt powerless...

The doors of the carriage that he had locked had also been closed from outside by means of a latch that only the coachman could operate, preventing Fantomas from leaping out onto the road.

Fantomas slipped the muzzle of his revolver through the broken square of wood and shouted, “Nick, Nick, if you don’t stop immediately I’ll shoot you through six times to teach you to obey me!”

Nick did not answer. His only response was to whip the horses on. Drunk with rage, Fantomas was about to shoot when he realized that if he shot the coachman the horses would run on and maybe take the carriage head first into a ditch, or a river, or a ravine. The moats that ran along the road were deep and deadly. It would be better to leave Nick on his bench and see what would happen.

In the distance, possibly fifteen hundred yards ahead, Fantomas noticed the pointed turrets of the small castle at Gatchina, where his mistress waited. Furious that he did not understand what was happening, Fantomas once again hunkered down in the back of the carriage, pressed back to keep from being jolted from one side of the carriage to the other, closed his eyes and waited.



CHAPTER XVII - A Strange Discovery



What had happened? Why had the bomb provided by Old Riga not exploded in the crowd, in keeping with Fantomas’ plans? And why had Fat Nick, usually so obedient, refused to stop the horses when his master had ordered him to do so?

That same morning, Juve, who had experienced a certain amount of disappointment when he saw that Colonel Sarkov was to take over from him and guard the imperial necklace instead of Boris Pokroff, whom he would have liked to meet, had nevertheless the accepted the offer to get a little rest.

Juve slept for a few hours, in a private apartment at the palace and, as soon as he woke, as soon as he was ready to go downstairs, he was visited by a chamberlain who invited him to go and see the emperor immediately.

His Majesty declared, “Mr. Juve, I’ve been told by people who have followed your exploits how audacious and dedicated you are. I have been told that your greatest desire would be to live incognito in the entourage of those who help us and defend us. Is that true?"

Curious to know what the Emperor was thinking, to find out where he was headed, Juve nodded and replied, “It is, your Majesty."

The Emperor apologized, “The Duchess Ekaterina asked you, Mr. Juve, to protect someone to whom she has given her well-meaning affection. That is our chief of police, Mr. Boris Pokroff, is it not?”

“That’s true,” said Juve.

“So,” continued the Emperor,” You would like to be in constant contact with Boris Pokroff without him suspecting your true identity?”

“Absolutely,” said Juve.

The policeman was thrilled with this turn of events. The Tsar, moreover, added some information that fulfilled a wish Juve had not dared express.

“I want,” declared the Emperor, “To recognize

Boris Pokroff’s dedication by giving him a present that will please him. I have decided to take two handsome horses from my imperial stables. I assign you Juve to deliver these wonderful animals and offer them on my behalf to Boris Pokroff. You will tell him that you are the groom responsible for maintaining the beasts and Boris Pokroff will most certainly hire you so that you can continue to provide the care you usually give to these horses. Is that acceptable for you? Would you agree, Mr. Juve, to perform such a lowly role for our excellent friend?”

Juve bowed deeply and replied, “Your Majesty may rest assured that I do not feel any role is lowly or superior when taking on a mission.”

Thirty minutes later, Juve went to the imperial stables and took charge of the two horses the Tsar had decided to give to the chief of the secret police.

The Emperor had not been lying when he said that they were superb beasts. They were magnificent with their shiny, silky coats, well-defined muscles, and perfect, impeccable lines. They went by the names of Mars and Bellon, which were well chosen since the two proud steeds, judging by their martial look, clearly embodied the two mythological deities for whom they were named.

Juve, disguised as a groom then headed, a few moments later, to the stables which, although more modest than those of the Tsar, were still luxurious, where the teams for the various individuals assigned to live at Tsarskoye Selo were housed. He located the buildings reserved for Boris Pokroff’s stables and suddenly found himself face to face with the enormous Nick, who looked at him in dismay.

Juve tried in vain to engage the enormous coachman in conversation, but the man was completely incapable of the slightest thought or movement. Nick had, in fact, drunk a formidable amount the previous evening and was now paralyzed, incapable of the slightest movement. Juve had found him in the middle of a pile of hay in a stall. Yet, as he noticed two other stalls that were empty, he led the two horses there and, wondering what was to happen to him, he had decided to wait and see, when he heard someone at the door to the stable calling for Nick.

At the threshold to the stable, Juve barely saw the silhouette of one of the red giants who served as military domestics at the palace of Tsarskoye Selo and he walked over to the man, taking the place of the fat coachman. As soon as he saw Juve, the red giant gave an order to the policeman, whom he took for a groom.

“You have to couple Boris Pokroff’s armored carriage to the horses,” he said. “Tell the coachman. Nick had better bring oats and supplies since they’ll be heading to Gatchina.”

“Perfect!" murmured Juve who had suddenly come up with an idea and replied to the orders of the man in red with a question.

“When is the carriage to be ready?”

“In an hour!" the man replied.

Juve’s idea was certainly audacious, but also quite ingenious. He had examined the situation quickly. Nick, who was incredibly drunk, was in no shape to drive. At the same time, the coach was ordered for three o’clock and it was obvious that Boris Pokroff was planning to set out for his estate. Juve had been informed by the Tsar about the intentions of the police chief who, under the pretext of guarding the Empress’ necklace, had announced clear and loud that he was going to take it with him to Gatchina. Juve felt that there was something mysterious about all this and now he was being given an opportunity to take Nick’s place, an opportunity he could not pass up.

What did he have to risk, after all? If anyone noticed that he was not Nick and just a simple groom, he would say that he took the man’s place to help a colleague who was a little bit under the weather. Yet, if no one noticed, that would be even better and he would be in a better position as a coachman than a groom to protect the chief of police as he had promised the Duchess Ekaterina he would.

Yet, Juve did not have a minute to waste if he wanted the carriage to be ready on time. He asked around in the stable to find out where it was kept and was told that it was kept in a shed a way off, at the very end of the service buildings.

First, the supposed groom went through the pockets of the enormous Nick, taking his keys, then he headed over to the shed. As soon as he opened the door, he spotted the carriage he was to drive. Juve never liked to get involved in anything without first finding out exactly what he was supposed to do or the nature of the objects he was to handle. When he took the carriage out of the shed, he looked at it closely, examining it.

Suddenly, the policeman called put in surprise. He had noticed a strange, unexpected device under the front end of the carriage. Someone had attached a small object under the front of the carriage and a wire ran from that object into the carriage, as if to serve as means to activate the mysterious package.

“Oh! Oh!” thought Juve, “What does this mean? Here’s a device that has no place on a carriage!”

For a moment, he thought about pulling on the wire to see what would happen but, when he noted a metallic flash in the package, he had a premonition that stopped him from putting his plan into action. Juve cautiously removed the package from the coachwork.

He took a close look at the heavy object and cried out, “Good grief! It’s a bomb!”

The explosive device looked familiar to the policeman. In France, he had had the opportunity to seize similar devices from Polish and Russian refugees. He was well aware of the danger, but he also knew how to render such terrible devices inoffensive. All he had to so was tear off the capsule designed to trigger the explosion to make it inoperative.

The bomb that Juve had found under the carriage was in fact, not a time bomb but a percussion bomb. Juve calmly placed it in his pocket, convinced that it no longer posed any threat and then, thinking about the discovery he had just made, he set off to hitch up the horses the horses offered as a gift by the Emperor.

“So, now I’m a coachman,” thought Juve, “And I work for a police officer that someone wants to assassinate. This isn’t really bad for starters. All the same, the Duchess Ekaterina cannot be as cowardly as people may think. She was right to entrust the protection of her lover to me. I do believe that if I had not been here this afternoon, Boris Pokroff would no longer be in this world tonight!”

Juve, in fact, was far from realizing that if a bomb had been placed under the carriage of the chief of the secret police, it was precisely the police chief who had placed it there. Yet Juve was so intelligent that this idea gradually made its way into his mind. And as he hitched the horses to the carriage and since he was intrigued by the discovery of the bomb, Juve returned several times to verify the position in which he had found the device. Then he realized that the wire was the only means for detonating the bomb. And since that wire ran into the carriage, Juve logically concluded that the person responsible for the attack would, obviously, be sitting in that very carriage.

Satisfied with this simple train of thought, Juve declared, “Well, when we know who is to board the carriage, we’ll know who is supposed to set off the bomb!”

Juve then came up with a highly inventive plan. Placing the wire in its original location, namely allowing the end to emerge, he placed the other end on the coachman’s bench.

“I’ll attach the end to my foot,” Juve said to himself. “When the would-be assassin wants to blow up the device, he will merely tug on my shoe!”

Thirty minutes later, the armored car of the chief of police, headed into the courtyard of the imperial palace. There was an enormous coachman on the driver’s bench, who resembled Fat Nick from a distance. Yet the coachman was none other than Juve who, when taking place of Boris Pokroff’s phenomenal servant, who was still dead drunk, had put on the man’s clothing and packed it with straw.

Juve had coupled the new horses, the gift intended for the chief of police, and expected the surprise Boris Pokroff would experience when he saw them.

“He’ll most likely question me,” he said. “I made a mistake and I should have used the regular horses.”

Juve barely had time to think before he saw the chief of the secret police walking down the main staircase, carrying the chest that held the valuable necklace. Oblivious to the new horses, he dove into the carriage and gave the order, “To Gatchina!”

He’d noticed nothing different about the horses.

Juve did not have to be given his instructions twice and, wrapping his horses with a masterful flick of his whip, he set out from the imperial palace, heading through, and along the avenues and streets. With the remarkable precision that he owed to his natural gift to get his bearings marvelously no matter where he was, and to know a region in depth after merely examining a map for a few moments.

Juve knew Tsarskoye Selo, St. Petersburg and the outlying areas as he knew Paris, having spent his entire trip from France to Russia carefully studying the map.

He was on his way, surprised to note that there was only one man in the carriage and was telling himself that, in all likelihood, the man who had planned to travel with Boris Pokroff had not been able to tag along when he suddenly felt the iron wire that he had attached to his foot tense just as they were approaching a large busy square.

“It can't be,” said Juve. “I must be mistaken. No one can be pulling on the wire!”

Juve felt like a puppet. He shook his foot and felt nothing more.

“I was wrong,” he said. “Furthermore, it cannot possibly be Boris Pokroff trying to explode the device.”

Yet, after the carriage had traveled a few more yards, Juve no longer had any doubts. Someone was actually pulling on the wire, violently, from inside the carriage and Juve furiously exclaimed, “Well, I’m a complete imbecile! I should have realized! This Boris Pokroff is much stronger than I am!"

Juve, in fact, was developing a hypothesis and it was the right one. He’d noticed, without coming to any certain conclusion, that the bomb, when he had discovered it, was arranged so that it would destroy everything at the front of the carriage and spare everything at the rear when it was detonated. He thought about this and the light immediately turned on in his mind.

“Good grief!” he said. “Now I understand why Boris Pokroff took the Empress’ necklace with him, with such an ostentatious show. He’s organized a little attack on his person and was planning to escape unscathed after sacrificing his driver and horses. An explosion always upsets things for a certain distance. Boris Pokroff wanted the bomb to explode here, in this square, in the crowd. I can picture it all. Some people would have been killed; others injured. When Pokroff would have regained consciousness, because he would have certainly been knocked out, he would have noticed that the necklace had disappeared, that he had been robbed by his attacker. Well played! No one would ever have thought that the man behind the attack was actually the victim. Unfortunately for Boris Pokroff but fortunately for the Empress, Juve is the one sitting on the bench and he has the bomb in his pocket. Boris Pokroff’s plans would fail.”

So Juve, instead of obeying the order given by the man inside the carriage, who was supposed to be his master, whipped his horses on and did not stop. Juve never paid heed to threats and the more Boris Pokroff threatened him, the more he was convinced that he had the guilty party in his carriage. He wanted only one thing.

“Let’s get to Gatchina as quickly as possible,” he said. “Then we’ll explain things!”



CHAPTER XVIII - At the Bottom of a Well



Gatchina is located about 20 verste from Tsarskoye Selo. It is a small village inhabited by moujiks and a few municipal civil servants and surrounded by fields of crops and forests. A river filled with fish runs at the foot of the hamlet, providing a rather large quantity of fish for the inhabitants, who either eat it or sell it in the Tsarskoye Selo market.

There is one single large and luxurious property, located at the top of the village, next to a large pine forest. The park is surrounded by walls. People entered through a large gate, open in a welcoming manner. This property belongs to the chief of the secret police, Boris Pokroff. It is a unique dwelling where, for many years already, the veritable chief of the secret police came to rest from time to time. And, after Fantomas replaced him, he could hardly avoid the place.

The circumstances under which the assassinated chief of police usually traveled to the property made things easy for Fantomas. In fact, the real Boris Pokroff never made himself known when he traveled to Gatchina and always kept out of view. People in the area barely knew him as a result and Fantomas found it extremely easy to pass as the real chief of police. And he had done even better than that since he had even managed to trick the rulers and their entourage into believing that the man who replaced the real Boris Pokroff, after assassinating him, was none other than Boris Pokroff himself.

That day, a carriage pulled by two robust horses, galloping easily over the snow, had appeared like a black dot on the horizon then gradually drew nearer to the village of Gatchina, running the risk that it would crush the peasants and children playing in the street. The driver of the vehicle whipped his horses on, rather than slowing, until they were covered with sweat, as they pulled through the gate and came to a stop at the foot of the stairs.

Juve, who had managed to pull off the masterful stroke of locking the chief of the secret police in the carriage, after realizing what the man was up to, was more certain than ever that his captive had not only decided to steal the empress’ necklace but also fake an explosion to make people believe that while trying to protect the valuable piece of jewelry he had been the victim of an attack, during which the item in question had disappeared.

Juve told himself, “The first thing to do is get my man to his destination. He’ll be greeted by people from the police or the army and will have to admit that he has the famous necklace with him. The fictional attack did not take place and he will have to come up with something else and, since I know exactly what he’s up to, it will be easy for me to keep an eye on him!”

So, Juve had managed to kill two birds with one stone and was congratulating himself. He was going to keep an eye on Boris Pokroff, a man he had long ago lost trust in and someone he felt might be a villain. And he was going to be able to inform the Duchess Ekaterina that he was tracking the chief of the secret police and that he was prepared to protect him in the event anything happened.

Juve, who had initially planned, as soon as he arrived at Gatchina, to seize the necklace from the chief of the secret police and have a frank talk with the man, decided to do nothing of the sort.

He would wait to see what happened, to see what this man would do once the carriage stopped and he got out.

If Boris Pokroff complained that he had not stopped, as he had been ordered to, Juve would have no trouble playing the imbecile and claiming that either he had not heard the instructions or that his horses had run away.

The door was closed from the outside and when the carriage stopped in front of the front porch, two enormous Cossacks rushed over to open it and Boris Pokroff leapt out. Without responding to the obsequious greetings addressed to him by a delegation of moujik, headed by the village mayor, he spoke to the mayor, while motioning for the Cossacks.

Juve noted that, while listening to the chief of the secret police, the three men glanced at him out of the corners of their eyes. And he wondered what they could be discussing.

However, the two Cossacks immediately leapt up onto the bench beside the French policeman. One of them instructed him to lead his horses on. They showed him where the stables were and Juve rejoiced at this turn of events.

“Well,” he said. “My man had a fright. He didn’t dare complain since he realized I had uncovered his plans.”

The policeman imagined that the Cossack had climbed up beside him to show him where to uncouple his team. Yet, they had barely arrived in front of the stable when the large officers, as if obeying an unseen signal, pushed him hastily down from his seat and tied him up.

“Well,” thought Juve, “Things are not going well. What are these two types going to do with me?”

He did not resist, knowing that it would be futile and settled for waiting. The two Cossacks remained still, standing next to their prisoner, until a small man, wrapped in a large black coat, came over to join them. It was the man who, a few moments earlier, had headed the delegation of moujiks.

“What’s your name?” he asked, looking at Juve suspiciously.

The policeman replied, “I’m Nick, the driver...”

But the mayor interrupted him, saying, “That’s not true. We know Nick. He’s fatter than you are and always drunk. Boris Pokroff has had you arrested because you disobeyed a while back. You’ll probably be sentenced to fifty lashes of the whip.”

Juve tensed. The possibility of such a punishment did not exactly fill him with joy. Yet, on the other hand, he figured that if all they punished him for was disobedience, he could consider himself lucky.

He asked, “Then what will happen to me?”

The mayor answered quietly, saying, “Once you have been whipped, you’ll be free, like any other man who has paid his debt to society.”

While speaking, however, the mayor had walked closer to Juve and, taking a closer look at the policeman’s attire. He was wearing a coat four times too large, which he had stuffed with straw. The mayor started patting the large pockets in his coat when, suddenly, he shivered and withdrew his hand from the pocket into which he had plunged it. He pulled out an object, dropped it immediately to the ground and ran off, followed by the two Cossacks, all three men shrieking.

“What’s up with them?” Juve wondered.

He looked down at the object that had caused this sudden terror and burst out laughing. It was the bomb, the famous bomb, which he had discovered before setting out from Tsarskoye Selo, the bomb that was in fact absolutely inoffensive.

“Really, these people are getting all into a dither and I will have to show them that without any trigger the device cannot explode.”

A few seconds later, Juve watched as the mayor returned, accompanied by moujiks, Cossacks and even Boris Pokroff. The little herd advanced with a certain amount of trepidation as if they had been told not to approach the bomb. Boris Pokroff, however, was braver than the others. He walked right up to Juve, picked up the explosive device at his feet and glanced at it quickly, making sure that it was inoffensive. Of course, he knew better than anyone that it was harmless, but, in order to pull the wool over the eyes of everyone around them, Boris Pokroff picked the bomb up gingerly and threw it into a bucket of water. Only then did the moujiks, the mayor and the Cossacks decide to approach.

Juve suddenly turned very pale. Not out of fear, but surprise. In fact, his glance had just caught that of Boris Pokroff. It had only lasted a moment, but it was enough time for Juve to make a sensational deduction.

Had Juve recognized Fantomas?

In any case, after his initial surprise, the policeman decided that he would not let anything show although his conviction was so strong, as the other men discussed his fate for an hour.

After their initial surprise, the Cossacks were furious. They waved their arms, thrust their fists in Juve’s face, slapped the pistols hanging from their belts. The policeman understood enough Russian to realize what they were saying about him.

“He’s foreigner, an assassin. He wanted to blow our master up. He must be killed.”

“Yes!” cried the moujiks. “Death! Without any further type of trial!”

Batons were raised over Juve’s head. Pistols were taken from the Cossacks belts.

The policeman, who had believed that he was in no danger just a short while earlier, thought, “I do think I’m lost this time. There’s no point in trying to explain anything at all to these brutes. With the slightest movement on my part, any word of rebellion, they’ll all jump on me!”

The mayor, however, intervened, placing himself in front of the men who were threatening Juve. With a strong, powerful voice, that was astonishing from such a little man, he said, “You have no right to put the prisoner to death. Of course, he’s a wretch, but he must be sentenced in keeping with the law. As mayor of the town, I’m responsible and the chief of the secret police will not contradict that.”

Boris Pokroff hid a grimace. It seemed to Juve that, despite the fact that it was illegal to do so, the police chief would have willingly allowed the crowd to massacre the prisoner. Yet, challenged by the mayor, Boris Pokroff had to give up.

“The mayor is right,” he said. “There is no doubt that this man, on whom we found the bomb, wanted to assassinate me, but he must be judged, sentenced and executed in due course, out of respect for justice.”

The mayor immediately took charge, saying “The man will be taken to the prison in Tsarskoye Selo this very evening. It's the closest prison to the town”

But Boris Pokroff frowned, as a brief smile flitted over Juve’s lips. Juve felt as if he had just escaped from a great danger. As long as he was not executed immediately, assassinated on the spot, he would find a way out of this jam.

When he would appear before the Tsarskoye Selo judges, he would merely have to identify himself, to call on the Duchess Ekaterina and perhaps even the emperor and the empress, to testify. He would explain what he had discovered and then it would be Boris Pokroff who found himself between a rock and a hard place. Moreover, Juve had the impression that Pokroff was perfectly aware of this.

When the mayor had announced that the prisoner would be taken to Tsarskoye Selo, Boris Pokroff asked, “Is there no prison closer than that one which is at least 20 verste away?”

“No,” replied the little mayor, who was quite imperious despite his small stature. “I know, police chief, what I have to do. I will make a call in a while from my office and asked for cavaliers to be sent to accompany this man, who will make the trip on foot, in chains.”

“But, in the meantime?” Boris Pokroff asked.

“In the meantime,” said the mayor, “the Cossacks and the peasants will guard the prisoner in an office at the town hall.”

Already, despite his bonds, Juve was trying to take a few steps. He was worried about staying at this place and the idea of being transferred to the town hall was satisfactory to him.

But Boris Pokroff made one last effort, saying, “There is no need to burden your town hall with this prisoner. Moreover, the building is not suitable. I propose that you leave him here, in this shed, under the Cossacks’ guard. Then we can rest assured that he will not escape.”

The crowd accepted Boris Pokroff’s proposal and Juve, who was most dissatisfied with the outcome, walked into the shed and was about to sit in a corner as the Cossacks took up their positions outside the door, joined by a few peasants.

Juve examined them one by one and, convinced that they were fierce but brave jailers, thought, “As long as I keep these guards, I will have only my adversary to fear.”

The adversary was most perplexed and upset. When he had stepped down out of the carriage and had glanced in amazement at the extraordinary coachman who had been driving his carriage, he had been struck by the latter’s appearance. Fantomas had shivered from head to toe when he recognized Juve on Nick’s bench. As of that moment, he had had only one thought in mind: to capture the policeman and hold him at his mercy. He figured it would be a simple matter. By accusing his driver, in front of the drivers, of showing a lack of respect and of disobeying him, he would be able to have him bound and punished with 50 lashes of the whip.

After that, Fantomas would step in and give Juve, devastated and broken by the punishment, the final blow. It would take place between the two men, one on one, but no one would ever know how or why Boris Pokroff’s fake driver had died.

Unfortunately, the Mayor of Gatchina searched through Juve’s pockets and discovered the bomb. As of that moment, the prisoner’s case became much more serious. From a simple disrespectful driver, Juve had been transformed into a major criminal, an assassin. It was no longer a matter of giving him 50 lashes of the whip, he had to be tried and hung. In the name of the municipality, the mayor took charge, and Juve escaped from Fantomas’ clutches.

For that reason, his heart full of rage, Fantomas was obliged to declare that the mayor was right and that the man could not be put to death without going through the formalities of being judged. This all took about ten minutes and Fantomas, putting off any decision as to how he would put Juve to death until later, despite the mayor, despite the Cossacks and the moujiks, went inside the house.

He walked up to the first floor and had barely stepped onto the landing when two arms wrapped around his neck, two lips sought his.

Duchess Ekaterina, who had been waiting for him in the shadows, now caressed him tenderly.

“Oh, Boris!” the duchess murmured, pulling her lover close. “I’m so happy to see you here. I’ve been waiting for you for two hours already and I was wondering why you were so late. Your profession is so dangerous, so formidable that I constantly fear for you.”

Fantomas returned the duchess’ passionate embrace, then walked with her into the small, brightly lit drawing room. A table had been set in the middle of the room. Dinner time was long past and night was, in fact, falling.

The duchess looked at the so-called chief of police and was astonished by his distraught air.

“By all that’s holy!" she said, clasping her hands, “What has happened to you, Boris? You look upset.”

Fantomas responded, starting to smile, and said, “Nothing, well almost nothing...”

Then, out of bravado, in order to make himself look good to his mistress, he nonchalantly said, “People tried to assassinate me two or three times on my way, but I managed to get away and now I’ve put it out of my mind.”

The duchess turned quite pale and sought Fantomas’ eyes. For a few moments, since her lover had arrived, the duchess had felt perplexed. She had watched as the carriage arrived in front of the house and, when she saw someone on the driver’s bench who was not Nick, her intuition told her that it had to be Juve. Had Juve not protected her lover? And why had she heard shouting from the stables just a few moments after the coach arrived?

The duchess asked, “You’re telling me Boris Pokroff, that someone wanted to harm you? What happened to your attackers?”

“I don’t know,” Boris Pokroff replied evasively. “The local police are looking for them.”

“Was no one arrested?” the duchess asked.

“No one,” Fantomas said sharply and, in an effort to turn the conversation in another direction, he walked over to his mistress, kissed her hand and said, “You look lovely tonight, Ekaterina.”

For a moment, the duchess wondered if her lover were telling her the truth, if nothing had actually happened when he arrived by coach at Gatchina and if there were no prisoner under guard in the sheds. But she had no opportunity to ask any more questions. Looking quite festive, her lover invited her to sit down at the dinner table and then they both dug into the meal, honoring the dishes that the servants had served in advance, in the Russian fashion.

They spent two hours eating, during which time a joyful Fantomas told his mistress about the dangers of his profession, concluding, “And none of that matters as long as I love you Ekaterina and you love me.”

For some time, the duchess had concluded that if she managed to get her lover to agree to Juve’s protection, it would be much better for both the policeman and the chief of the secret police. Although she had not mentioned the famous French inspector she had sent for to Boris Pokroff, she had done so just to spare his sensibilities. She decided that that evening would be an excellent time to speak to Boris Pokroff about Juve. She walked over to her lover, placed her head tenderly on his shoulder and murmured, “Boris, I see a cloud in our heavenly sky. And that cloud is large and black, full of menace. I would like your permission to chase it from my horizon.”

Fantomas was filled with curiosity as he listed to his beautiful mistress and said, “Your words are filled with filling and poetry but, like a poet, your meaning is not clear. Please tell me what you mean.”

“Oh, it’s quite simple,” the duchess said, with a smile. “I’m afraid for your Boris. I feel that you don’t have the protection you need to practice your profession.”

The so-called chief of police shrugged and replied, “How could I find anyone better than myself to protect me? You know, Ekaterina this unfortunate country is full of felons and traitors.”

“I know!" replied the duchess. “That's why if you agree to have a reliable and devoted protector at your side I would not look for one in Russia, but elsewhere...”

“Really,” said the so-called Boris Pokroff, amused by the conversation. “And where would you go to find such a rare pearl?”

“To France! To Paris!”

“Paris!” Boris Pokroff repeated. “And who would you select in Paris?”

Sharply, the duchess replied, “I would choose the famous French policeman, Juve, since Juve is honest and clever. Juve is brave and incorruptible.”

Well, if the duchess had known the true identity of the man to whom she was praising Juve, if she had suspected for one moment that Boris Pokroff, her lover, was none other than Fantomas, she would have been dumbfounded.

But the duchess did not suspect a thing and, taking her lover's silence for approval, she spent another 10 minutes insisting that he hire Juve to protect him, as soon as possible.

Women find it hard to keep secrets and, in order to finish with a firm proposal, the Duchess Ekaterina announced, “Juve is in Russia, in St. Petersburg. For several days now, he has been protecting you without your knowledge, Boris Pokroff. And he is doing so at my request. Ill tell you something else. Juve was your coachman this afternoon. He’s the one who brought you here and he’s busy taking care of your horses in your stables this very minute. Do it for me, sweetheart. Agree to let Juve protect you officially. He’ll be more efficient like that. Boris Pokroff, do you want me to have him brought here?”

Considering the circumstances, considering the Duchess’ anxiety, Fantomas thought for a few moments. Although Ekaterina suspected nothing, it was quite clear that he did not have to consider the strange coincidence that she was offering to have Fantomas protected by Juve at the very moment that Juve was at Fantomas’ mercy. Yet, the sinister bandit wondered if the duchess was not playing some sort of game, confronting him in this manner to determine her lover’s exact nature...

“You never know, just what these Russian men and women are thinking!” thought Fantomas, who had no idea of making his own thoughts known.

He adopted an impassive expressive and appeared to be touched by his mistress’ proposal. He took her hands and clasped them, pulling the duchess into the adjacent room while planting a paternal kiss on her forehead.

“Ekaterina, your proposal touches me enormously. Unfortunately, I cannot respond right away. I’m exhausted and you are as well. I can see your beautiful eyelids drooping. Get some sleep. We’ll discuss matters tomorrow.”

The duchess realized that she should not insist. She obeyed her lover and immediately went into the dressing room next door to undress.

Fantomas immediately left the room and snuck down the stairway. He managed to make his way outside without being noticed by the servants, most of whom had already gone upstairs to be. He headed straight over to the shed.

The Cossacks were there alone with the prisoner. The peasants had stood guard for a while and then had gone home, leaving the soldiers alone. When he saw this, Fantomas shivered with excitement. For close to two hours, he had been wondering how he could get rid of the unbearable guards and he had found no way since he had no authority over the moujiks. Yet they had taken themselves home and all that remained were the soldiers. He could easily have his way with them

They were veritable robots, never thinking, never reasoning, satisfied with rigorously obeying the orders they received. When he saw them, on the threshold of the door to the room in which Juve was kept, bound, the so-called Boris Pokroff pretended to be furious.

“How can this be, you sinister brutes,” he said.

“What are you still doing here?”

One Cossack stood up, touched his hat and respectfully said, “Master, we’re still guarding the prisoner. We have not been relived.”

Fantomas shrugged and said, “You’re just a bunch of donkeys. You see no farther than the tip of your nose! Other men came on duty 45 minutes ago and are guarding the prisoner, just as you are, but they’re doing it from the other door to the shed.”

And since the Cossacks did not understand the explanation they had been given, Fantomas kicked them and punched them, chasing them away from the door.

“Go back to your barracks,” he roared. “We don’t need you!”

And, in order to pull the wool over their eyes, recalling that the soldiers were paid one kopek for each additional hour on duty, he scolded them imperiously, saying “Miserable wretches! I know what you’re up to! You’re extending your guard duty to make a little money. I don’t know why I don’t report you all to the station chief!”

Dumbfounded, the Cossacks fled. When they had disappeared into the night, a triumphant expression swept over Fantomas’ face. He had Juve all to himself and Juve was bound. He walked slowly into the shed, lit only by a smoky lamp hanging from the ceiling. In a hoarse voice, Fantomas, who no longer needed to hide his identity, greeted his prisoner in a triumphant voice.

“Well, Juve!" he said. “So here we are, once again face to face.

Fantomas waited for a response, but received none. The policeman held his gaze without wavering. He was still rigorously bound, unable to move at all, barely able to stand, unable to take a step in any direction. Jubilantly, Fantomas walked around him.

“You’re all trussed up, Juve,” he said. “You’ve been rendered powerless and your life is in my hands."

Juve still did not answer and Fantomas grew exasperated.

“Oh” he continued, “I see your disdain and your mistrust, Juve, but we could have a lot to say to one another. It might be worth our while to provide a few explanations. Do you acknowledge that you are in my power, that I have beaten you? Fine, you could beg for my mercy, but you aren’t doing that and that’s your right. Your silence is just one more insult. I will be so magnanimous as to not take any further vengeance. If you held me captive as I hold you, you wouldn’t hesitate, Juve to kill me. I’m the stronger one, so I’ll kill you.”

Juve still had not uttered a sound. Perhaps his lips a turned a shade paler, perhaps he had clenched his fists under his bonds. Fantomas, however, searched through his pocket and was pulling out his revolver, when they heard the sound of footsteps approaching. Fantomas quickly turned out the light and settled down to listen. Two Cossacks arrived and took up their position in front of the door, which stood ajar.

“Did we get it right?” asked one.

“I hope so,” said the other. “I mean, our two comrades came back just now and told us that we were on duty so that means we’re on duty!”

“But, weren’t we at our station?” asked the first man.

“Most likely,” continued the second, “They forgot to tell us... Fortunately our comrades came back to warn us. Otherwise, we’d have been in a real jam. When a chief forgets to give his ubordinate an order and then he notices what has happened, it’s always the subordinate that suffers!”

“Should we step inside?” asked the first Cossack.

“No,” replied his companion. “We’ve not been given any orders in that respect and we don’t even know what we’re guarding.”

“Those imbeciles,” thought Fantomas. “They’ve arrived at exactly the wrong moment. How can I get rid of them?”

Fantomas thought for a moment and realized that, based on the conversation he had just overheard, nothing in the world would convince the Cossacks to abandon their station. At the same time, Fantomas could only kill Juve with his revolver, since he had no other weapons with him. But a revolver makes noise and when they heard the destination, the Cossacks would certainly rush in. However, Fantomas knew that the shed had a second door.

“Juve will die in silence," he said, as he came up with a horrific new plan for assassination.

Groping about, he approached the policeman, took him by the arm and pushed him forward. Juve obeyed automatically, only because he felt that each step helped loosen his bonds a little more.

“If only," he thought, “I could get Fantomas to make me walk two or three hundred yards, I could free my arms and legs. And then we’ll see what happens!”

Fantomas pushed Juve across the threshold of the door at the back of the shed that opened onto an inner court, at the foot of the house. Up to this point, the night had been dark. But at this very moment a small ray of light pierced through the clouds. Fantomas halted his prisoner. The rays of the moon concerned him, since he did not want anyone to see that he was putting his formidable enemy to death.

Despite his precautions, Fantomas had made a bit of noise while walking. The Cossacks were concerned about what was going on inside the shed they were guarding. Then, since the noises had subsided, they fell back into their torpor.

Yet, as Fantomas entered the inner court, lit by the rays of the moon, he had noticed a thread of light escaping through the curtains covering one of the windows and he realized that it was the window of the dressing room occupied by Duchess Ekaterina. That room, where the bandit’s mistress was undressing, looked out onto the inner court and the duchess must certainly have heard an unusual noise, since she must have been the one who opened the curtains and looked out into the court.

Fantomas was quite perplexed and wondered what he should do. He did not want the brutish Cossacks to witness the crime he was about to commit since they would certainly talk about it. At the same time, he didn’t want to assassinate Juve in front of the Duchess Ekaterina since he would then have to account for the murder. He could not use his revolver since he did not want to make any noise and he had no dagger.

Fantomas ground his teeth and clenched his fists. Of course, it would be easier enough for him to pit himself against Juve, who was defenseless, and strangle him, but the criminal feared that the policeman would resist, that Juve would cry out for help. He had to find another means to take his prisoner by surprise.

Suddenly, Fantomas felt his heart pound and a deep sense of satisfaction filled his mind.

“Why didn’t I think of this earlier?" he wondered.

He had dragged Juve out of the shed, in the direction of the inner court, without thinking about what he was going to do. But he had just noticed, on the ground, barely ten yards away, the moss-covered stone coping, blanketed with ice, of a deep well from which the estate’s stable hands came to get water each morning, after first breaking the ice. He did not hesitate. All he had to do was shove Juve, who was still bound.

Fantomas’ mind was made up. He grabbed Juve by the shoulder and, pretending to look in the opposite direction, he forced him to walk once more. Juve graciously agreed and took a few steps. He had the impression that his bonds were coming undone. Yet, as Fantomas had not noticed a thing, Juve pretended to have difficulty walking so that he could surprise the thief when his ropes were sufficiently loose that he could use his arms and legs. At one point, Juve felt as if one of the slip knots, that held his right arm to his thigh, had come completely undone. The ropes around his knees were coming lose as well.

“Just a few more steps and I’ll jump on Fantomas. The battle will be brief, but decisive!” Juve thought.

Juve’s eyes shone with hope since Fantomas seemed completely unaware. But, suddenly, Juve cried out in fright, surprise and anguish.

Fantomas had shoved him violently backward. Juve stumbled, feet slipping on the frozen snow, hip striking the edge of the well, the weight of his body dragging his legs along. The unfortunate man collapsed into his future tomb with a heavy thud.

Fantomas, however, kept on walking slowly, eyes riveted on the window of the Duchess Ekaterina’s washroom.

He sighed deeply in satisfaction and murmured, “The curtain has not moved. She heard nothing.”

Then Fantomas rushed into the house through a service entrance.



CHAPTER XIX - Magnanimity



“Boris Pokroff, is that you my friend?”

As Fantomas was dragging Juve toward the fatal edge of the well into which he planned to shove him, Duchess Ekaterina, pleased to know, or so she believed, that she had almost convinced her lover to allow himself to be accompanied by the policeman, in whom she had complete confidence, had walked into her dressing room, where she quickly disrobed.

On her way back to the bedroom, she had called for Boris Pokroff, imagining that he had gone to prepare for bed as well and supposing that he was ready to join her.

To her great surprise, Boris Pokroff did not respond and, when she walked into the bedroom, the duchess found that her lover was not there.

She called again, in a louder voice that betrayed a certain degree of surprise.

“Boris Pokroff! Boris Pokroff!”

Silence reigned around her. Dumbfounded by this absence, Duchess Ekaterina suddenly thought she heard unusual noises coming from outside. Instinctively, she walked over to the window that looked out onto the garden and, pushing the curtain aside, she noticed, in the weak moonlight, the characteristic silhouettes of two Cossacks. It was the men who had taken over for the comrades standing guard at the door to the shed.

Undoubtedly, the duchess found the presence of the soldiers reassuring and yet, she grew worried as she saw the men running.

What was going on? Was there an alert?

She tilted her head, listening, after first opening the window, fearing that she would hear the sound of battle. But silence fell again and, reassured for the time being, although she still had no idea what had become of Boris Pokroff, she went back into the bedroom, walked across it. Suddenly she hastened her pace and headed once again to her dressing room since she once again heard furtive noises that came, without a doubt, from the inner courtyard of the property.

That was when the duchess had pushed aside the curtain through which a thread of light glowed, the thread of light that had concerned Fantomas so as he was dragging Juve.

Yet, after opening the curtain for a second, the Duchess let it fall back and did not touch it again. Silence fell yet again and, hesitating, perplexed, not knowing where to look, the Duchess turned back and sat down on the foot of her bed, worried, waiting.

She heard a dull sound and, although she did not know where it came from, her chest grew tight. Ekaterina was afraid, strangely afraid. She had the feeling that she was surrounded by mysteries, that she had plunged into the middle of a frightening, disturbing unknown.

Then the door opened and the man the young woman knew as Boris Pokroff entered the bedroom.

Fantomas was very pale and unable to hide the shivers that ran up and down his body. The terrible bandit had the clear impression that, this time, he had got rid of his adversary, that Juve had fallen into the depths of the well. If ever anyone pulled him out, they would be bringing a cadaver back to the surface. Juve’s cadaver! Fantomas could not believe this turn of events and yet, it was obvious, indisputable, Juve had clearly plunged into the well, tightly bound, immobilized, incapable of offering any resistance!

His face grew peaceful.

“Definitely,” thought Fantomas, “the god of victory is with me. A few weeks ago, I trapped Fandor and today I’ve reduced Juve to nothing. The way ahead is clear.”

Fantomas was radiant... In the same manner as, up to now, he had never felt any remorse at the thought that he had caused the death of the noble journalist with the well-meaning heart —since Fantomas truly believed that Fandor was dead—he did not experience the slightest twinge of regret at the idea that Juve was now dying, was even most certainly dead.

Fantomas was thrilled with the idea of this double success. His trembling gone, face filled with triumph and tenderness, he walked over to the duchess whose bosom heaved. He hugged her tightly, surprised at her icy body.

“What’s wrong, dear heart?” he asked.

She snuggled against him and murmured, “I’m cold. But above all I’m afraid.”

Everything was sleeping or, to be more accurate, seemed to be sleeping, in the sumptuous house in Gatchina. Someone, however, was waking before dawn, since it was not yet three in the morning. That someone was the Duchess Ekaterina. She thought she had heard a cry, a dreadful groan, an agonizing shriek and she had leapt out of bed. Was it a dream? Was it real?

Ekaterina could not say, but she did not feel that she was hallucinating. She tried to go back to sleep, to snuggle down under the blankets next to her lover, who was sleeping soundly, but sleep eluded her.

The cry that had wakened her continued to resound in her ears and the duchess felt as if someone were calling her and that if she did not respond she would be responsible for a man’s death. With that thought, the duchess leapt out of bed.

She stopped abruptly at the entrance to her dressing room to make sure she had not roused Boris Pokroff. He continued to sleep. The duchess walked into the adjacent room, dressed hastily, pulling on thick, fur-lined boots and a heavy mantle, then opened the window.

Once again, the cry of anguish rang out. This time, there was no longer any doubt that someone outside was calling, someone who was suffering, who was on the point of dying and that cry came from the inner courtyard of the estate.

At that very moment, three bats, spinning in the air, struck the duchess' forehead, as she leaned out the window, and an owl could be heard shrieking in the distance, in the forest.

“What tragic omens!" said the duchess, who was indeed most superstitious.

As a deep sense of alarm washed over her, she felt an urgent need to ward off bad luck by going, even at the peril of her own life, to help the dying man who was calling her.

Walking down a hidden staircase, the duchess quickly reached the inner courtyard. The monotonous and persistent moans she heard took her in the direction of the old well. She leaned over the edge, looked down into the black hole and saw nothing. Yet, as she leaned in that position, she realized that the rope, which was used to lower the bucket into the well, was trembling slightly. Obviously, someone or something at the bottom of the abyss was pulling on the rope.

There was a handle and all she had to do was turn it to pull the cord at the end of the rope, up from the bottom of the well. The duchess struggled to turn it, wanting to respond to the call she felt was addressed to her. She turned the hand two or three times, and then, from the bottom of the well, she heard a voice cry out, “Be brave. Don’t give up! You can save me!”

The duchess turned the crank feverishly. Large drops of sweat beaded on her forehead. Two or three times, she had the impression that she would have to give up, that the job was too much for her. She stopped, placed the rope on the notch to prevent the bucket from slipping back down, caught her breath and set about turning the crank again.

As the work continued and grew more painful, the duchess felt that the load she was pulling up was growing heavier and heavier. The voice, however, continued to encourage her. She felt that the burden she was pulling was heavy, possibly a man’s body, the body of a human being of course...

For a second, she thought of calling out, of calling out to Boris Pokroff, telling him to come down, but a sense of foreboding, instinct, held her back, and her woman’s intuition made her believe that that was the right course of action, that it was preferable not to wake her lover.

After resting for a few minutes, the duchess set back to work. She continued to turn the crank, until her arms grew exhausted and her hands grew bloody. Finally, just as she was about to give up, unable to enjoy the benefits of this hard labor because she was no long able to hook the rope on the notch to prevent the bucket from tumbling down inside the well, a human form appeared and, with a supreme effort, leapt out of the bucket and fell to the ground at the duchess’ feet.

This human being was in a frightful, pitiful state, clothing frozen stiff, hands and face covered with blood, large ropes binding his arms to his chest. Nevertheless, demonstrating extraordinary vigor, the man managed to stand up, making his frozen bonds crack, He exclaimed in surprise, and the duchess, who had fallen to the ground, cried out in astonishment. The man had recognized her and the duchess, overcome with surprise, cried out the name of the rescued: “Juve!”

It was Juve, in fact who had miraculously escaped from the frightful death Fantomas had planned for him. As he fell down the well, Juve had managed to prop his back against the walls of the frightful abyss and descend slowly to the bottom. The water in the well was frozen. Juve had been able to stand on the ice and for a good half hour had remained immobile, fearing a new attack. Then, he had tried to climb up the wall of the well, after first making sure he heard no suspicious sounds in the vicinity. But, despite his efforts, Juve had fallen back two or three times, unable to climb out of the well on his own. He experienced such violent pain when he landed heavily on the surface of the frozen water that he was unable to stop from calling out. It was these cries that the duchess had heard, that had drawn her to the well to rescue the policeman. The duchess and the policeman stood facing one another, bewildered. Juve had not known that the duchess was at Gatchina. And the duchess could not understand how Juve, the extraordinarily skillful policeman, had fallen so low, risking death if she had not intervened.

“How did you get down there?” the duchess asked.

Juve was about to tell her everything. Fantomas’ name came to his lips. Instinctively, he was about to say that Fantomas had thrown him down the well, that Fantomas was none other than Boris Pokroff, but he thought better of it and abstained from making such an accusation.

He knew that the duchess was blinded by love!

Telling her outright that her adored lover, Boris Pokroff, was none other than the frightful bandit who saddened the entire world with his despicable crimes would not convince the duchess of her lover’s infamy, but give her every reason to believe that Juve was totally mad. Instead, Juve explained what had happened without telling her the entire truth.

“Madam,” he said, as he removed his ice-covered coat, “Boris Pokroff made a frightful error, took me for a criminal, tied me up and threw me into the well!”

The duchess was dumbfounded.

“Boris Pokroff did this to you?” she asked.

“Yes, madam,” replied Juve. “But it doesn’t matter since you rescued me.”

The duchess clasped her hands, and said, “My God! My God! Blessed be the Holy Images that inspired me to come to your rescue! I would never have forgiven myself if you had died. I would have felt responsible! Mr. Juve, I'm sure you realize now the difficulty of the mandate I have given you...”

She questioned him in a hesitant yet audacious manner, self-centered in her love, “Despite everything, will you continued to protect Boris Pokroff?”

“You can count on me,” Juve replied in an enigmatic tone.

Then abruptly changing the topic, he asked, “Madam, where is your protege at this moment?”

The duchess replied, “Boris Pokroff was tired and is resting at this moment. He is sleeping in our bedroom. See how delicate he is? He worried me so much, not mentioning a word about the attack on his person?

Despite the horror of his situation, Juve was unable to an ironic smile from his lips. Obviously, fate got him into the most unexpected situations! And now, to please this woman, he was obliged to go into raptures over the delicate nature of the man who had just pitched him into a well, who was counting on him to die there in great agony, and who had not uttered a single word to anyone, all in order to maintain his mistress’ peace of mind.

Sarcastically, Juve said, “Boris Pokroff is, in fact, a very tactful man!”

The duchess looked at Juve anxiously and said,

“You’re not angry with him?”

“Oh! Not at all!" Juve replied. “However, I would be pleased to have a word or two with him in a bit.”

“Let him rest a few more minutes,” the duchess asked. “His work is so hard and he is so often tired that I hesitate to wake him.”

“Being in love is a wonderful thing,” thought Juve who, with a pang in his heart, realized that he was tired too and that, unlike Fantomas, he did not have the luxury of sleeping in a bed. And he also thought about the fact that, barely out of the well that might have become his tomb, he would now have to take part in the ultimate battle, and conquer or die! For, in just a few seconds, Juve had decided that he had to finish his business with Fantomas, that he would surprise him while he slept, that their roles would change...

Juve had made up his mind. He would not attempt to wring an explanation from the bandit! He felt for his belt, where he had hidden a dagger, a dagger he planned to thrust, without further ado, into Fantomas’ heart, if Fantomas did indeed have a heart.

Teeth chattering, the duchess said, “Let’s go inside.”

These words tore Juve from his thoughts and he prepared to follow the pretty woman.

“She has just signed a death warrant,” he said to himself.

And, while Juve felt no pity at all for Fantomas, the thought of the pain this woman would experience, in a few minutes, when she saw her lover die, troubled him a great deal.

“Poor wretch,” Juve thought. “Love is such a sad thing when you love a criminal like Fantomas!”

The duchess was walking over to the small door from which she had left the building when she suddenly stopped. She reached out for Juve with a trembling hand and then, leaning against the policeman, Ekaterina murmured in a voice filled with anguish, “Did you hear that?”

“Yes,” Juve replied.

“What can it be? Could it be the Cossacks?” she asked.

With a finger, she pointed at the shadows moving along the wall, appearing from behind the rocks, from out of the dark corners, flowing out over the ground in the pale rays of the moon.

Two or three strident whistle calls rang out then and Juve and the Duchess felt as if they had been surrounded by a troupe of admirably well-organized people, with a mission to kidnap them!

Juve suddenly felt as if he weighed less than a feather. He was being carried at arm’s length and a gag had been placed in his mouth, but his eyes were not hidden and he could see. He saw that, like him, the duchess was being carried off. The audacious kidnappers that had rushed over, no doubt obeying orders, quickly walked away from the house and carried them into a sort of shed at the edge of the property.

The two captives were placed on the ground, side by side, and, as no one took notice of Juve, who once again found himself bound, they removed the ropes that had kept the duchess motionless. Voices around them whispered.

“It’s her! It’s Ekaterina!”

People spoke animatedly. Then, after placing the duchess under guard, they turned back to Juve. Someone quickly removed his gag. With a kick, they forced him to his feet. Juve fumed in anger and decided to make the kidnappers pay dearly, but the words he was about to utter died in his throat. The policeman was dumbfounded by what he heard.

“It's not him!" said someone standing in front of him. That individual was, apparently, neither a soldier nor a criminal. Quite the contrary, he inspired respect and confidence. He wore a long black robe and there was some sort of miter on his head. He must have been a monk, possibly even a pope!

“What is this animal doing here?” Juve asked, unable to stop smiling as he looked at the large, dumbfounded religious man. Someone walked over to the pope. It was a woman. In a broken, wavering voice that revealed her great age, she asked “So, you didn’t take Boris Pokroff? Answer me Alleluia. You can see that I’m burning with impatience to take my vengeance and carve that monster’s eyes out with my knitting needles!”

The pope nodded and replied, “No, Marfa Berena, we did not kidnap Boris Pokroff yet, and this is extraordinary since this is his house and that is his mistress standing there.”

As he heard this conversation, Juve experienced great fear along with a sliver of hope. The name of the pope, uttered by the old woman with the bloodthirsty intentions, told him immediately what his aggressors intended to do. Juve had just been captured by a band of nihilists, possibly the most famous and feared band in all of Russia, the band once headed by Natacha, the daughter of the real Boris Pokroff.

Juve wondered what he was to do with these people. Should he let them know who he was? There was one way in which to earn their good graces and that would be to denounce where Boris Pokroff or, more accurately, Fantomas, was hiding, it would be to tell them where he was sleeping. But, Juve found that behavior repugnant. A loud cry rang out. It was the duchess who had just realized whose hands she had fallen into and the danger faced by her lover. She addressed a supreme appeal to her companion, crying out, “Juve! In the name of God save me!”

This supplication reminded Juve about the solemn promise he had made to the duchess to protect the chief of police, her lover, to the death. This was a decisive, yet poorly chosen moment.

How could Juve prevent the nihilists from massacring Boris Pokroff, after they quickly found him in the house? They had acted gently, silently. He could feel that there were a large number of them, perhaps 20 or 30. Most likely they were not all in the shed and a large number of them must be watching the edges of the Gatchina property to make any escape impossible.

Juve’s situation was quite extraordinary. Obviously, he wanted Fantomas to die more than anyone else, but the idea of stirring up the nihilists against the bandit and using them to kill the criminal mastermind, masquerading as Boris Pokroff, was unacceptable to him. Juve’s soul was so great, and his concept of conscience and duty was so rigorous that he could not behave in that manner.

“Between Fantomas and me, it will be a fight to the end, a duel without mercy, but that will only happen after we have come face to face and have both taken off our masks. At present, for these people, and for the duchess as well, that is not Fantomas up there in the house, but simply Boris Pokroff. And I made a promise to Boris Pokroff’s mistress that I would protect her lover. I must do my best to keep my oath.”

Once again, the policeman heard Ekaterina begging, murmuring words that only Juve could understand, “Save us Juve! By all the Holy Images, save us!”

As the nihilists continued to whisper quietly, the policeman remained silent, forehead furrowed, trying to come up with a plan. Suddenly, he looked up and in a clear voice called out, “Alleluia!”

The pope turned to him. He walked over to Juve and looked him in the eyes, saying, “Do you know me?”

“Good grief,” Juve replied. “Aren’t you Alleluia, the pope who officiates in the heights of Valdai, where your church is located?”

“That’s right!" the religious man acknowledged. “But you...”

Juve continued, “Aren’t you Alleluia, the famous leader of the right and good cause, the man who commands the empire’s nihilists, and whose sect grows stronger every day than all of the Tsar’s armies combined?”

“All that is true,” the pope replied, unnerved. “But you...”

“Are you not,” continued Juve, “The man who, justly indignant to hear people say that the nihilists are committing theft and larceny for profit, discovered that such thefts were committed by a bandit by the name of Fantomas?”

“That is perfectly true. Are you Fantomas?” he replied.

Juve shrugged and continued, “Are you not Alleluia who, disdaining to search for a criminal yet wanting to get rid of him had, at the instigation of a few of his followers, addressed a telegram to the most famous policeman in all of France, inviting him to come and capture that Fantomas whose actions reflect so dishonorably on the just actions of the nihilists?”

“Ah, now...” hesitated the pope.

Juve interrupted him once again, reached out his hand and declared, “Now you recognize me, don’t you, Alleluia? You realize that the man standing before you is Juve.”

The nihilists had gathered at the pope’s sides and, as Juve raised his voice, they heard his last declarations. A murmur ran through the crowd.

“Juve! It’s Juve,” someone said and the whispering grew.

The duchess, however, surprised and despairing at discovering that the policeman was pacifying the nihilists, rolled about on the ground, overcome with emotion.

“My God!” she said. “Juve is betraying me...”

Fortunately, she was speaking French and the nihilists did not understand what she was saying. But Juve jumped at the insult.

“No, madam, I’m not betraying you. Quite the contrary as you will see...”

The pope clasped Juve’s hands warmly and declared, “We had no idea what had happened to you. Why didn’t you warn us?”

“A policeman,” Juve replied, “is always under cover. He only appears when not expected. But I’m ready to follow you now. In fact, it’s even rather important that we leave as quickly as possible, since this place is dangerous. I know that Boris Pokroff left Tsarskoye Selo an hour ago with a troupe of horsemen to go to Gatchina. He’ll be here soon, with men who are armed to the teeth. And you won’t be able to withstand them.”

“Boris Pokroff,” exclaimed the nihilists. “So, he’s not in the house we’ve surrounded?”

“Of course he isn’t!” replied Juve.

The policeman uttered this lie with a certain amount of apprehension. If they did not believe him, if they decided to search the building, they would most certainly discover Boris Pokroff and massacre him. And Juve, who would be considered a liar and traitor, would not escape the supreme punishment.

Juve realized that by making his claim, he was playing rough. He needed an argument, some proof to back up his statement, to convince his audience of the truth of his words. They did, in fact, seem only half convinced.

One stated, “We were almost certain, however, that Boris Pokroff had arrived in Gatchina this afternoon to join his mistress. And his mistress is here. We’ve captured her!”

Juve suddenly came up with an idea... It was crazy, wild, but was he not risking everything and wouldn’t something unlikely and unexpected seem more logical and plausible?

“You’re thinking is faulty,” Juve grumbled.

“Why?” a man asked. “Explain yourself!”

You have just noted that the Duchess Ekaterina...”

They interrupted him.

“There is no duchess here. We do not accept that title of nobility!”

“So be it,” Juve replied, shrugging. “But that is of no importance! You have noted, as I said, that Ekaterina is here and you have concluded that

Boris Pokroff must be with her. But what about me?”

“You?” asked Pope Alleluia, “What about you? We don't understand.”

Juve drew the man closer and replied, “Listen, it’s quite simple. I’ll tell you in a low voice but you must not spread this around. I wouldn’t want to embarrass this lady. Later, you can tell your companions after we have left, since I will be leaving with you. So, this is where we stand. I’m Ekaterina’s lover. Do you understand me, Pope? I’m cuckolding Boris Pokroff with his mistress. So, it’s quite certain that if I am here with her tonight, Pokroff cannot be!”

Pope nodded and said, “As a religious man, I’m not really aware of the customs of adultery. Yet, I suppose that you must be right. In fact, if this woman’s lover caught you with her, he would not hesitate to kill you...”

“That’s obvious,” Juve replied derisively. “Either he would kill me or I’d kill him. In any case, one of us would be dead... but since we’re both alive you have to admit that I’m here and Boris Pokroff is not!”

The pope nodded, agreeing with the policeman’s logic.

First, when she had heard Juve’s declarations, the duchess had jumped in indignation. What? This policeman was claiming to be her lover. His lie to the wretches was so vile. She was about to protest, but, fortunately, she abstained. In fact, she quickly realized that, although Juve was boasting about a good fortune that existed only in his imagination and was compromising her reputation, it was to save her lover’s life!

The pope quietly told some of the nihilists surrounding him what Juve had just said. They appeared to take the ingenious policeman at his word.

Juve waited, understandably anxious, for the outcome of the secret conversation. What would they decide?

Finally, the pope approached him and said, “My friends are of the opinion that you must be telling the truth. They understand love and respect your feelings. Since you love her, no harm will be done to Ekaterina, as long as she swears on your head not to reveal that she has seen us here this evening. Moreover, we will not take her with us. She can go back inside her house and stay there quietly. As for you, Juve, we are counting on you to come with us. It is agreed that this is just a truce. It does nothing to change our plans for Boris Pokroff. Since he’s coming here with the horsemen, we’ll leave this place immediately, but we will be back! His time, the time of his punishment, is coming!”

Juve applauded the pope’s words and said, “Brave! Bravo! Let us leave together. While you come up with a plan to take care of Boris Pokroff, I'll be working on one for Fantomas!”

Silently, slowly, fading into the dark walls, the nihilists left as they had come, invisible.

Juve quickly bade the duchess farewell, and disappeared in the company of the nihilists. After a few moments, there was no one left in the park at Gatchina, which was blanketed in silence.

The duchess remained motionless as excitement coursed through her veins. Ah, Juve had definitely given her extraordinary proof of his skill and dedication. The policeman had just saved her and her lover, and he did it just a few moments after Boris Pokroff had made a near fatal mistake and killed him.

When she was certain that there was no one in the garden, the duchess raced into the house and up the stairs to her room, where she thought she would find her lover still asleep. She was preparing to tell him about all the dangers he had risked without knowing it. When she walked into the room, she found the man she knew as Boris Pokroff up and dressed. He looked quite pale.

The duchess threw herself into his arms and stammered, “Oh! Boris, Boris, you have no idea of the great danger you have missed!”

The duchess’ lover nodded his head, gravely and replied, “I know that something terrible has happened, duchess, but I do not know what. I suffered during your absence and did not dare make a move, for fear of compromising a situation I did not understand.”

“Listen!” said the duchess, throwing her arms around her lover’s neck.

Then, in a halting, quavering voice, Ekaterina who had no idea as to the true identity of the man she was confiding in told him everything, as she understood it, as Juve had presented it to her.

After half an hour, she concluded, saying, “Boris Pokroff, you will never love this man enough, this man who, after being thrown into the well by you, felt no bitterness toward you and saved you from the nihilists! This man, I have not told you his name yet, but you need to know his name.”

But to her great surprise, Boris Pokroff interrupted her and uttered the name, “Juve! Juve is the man!”

“And how do you know that?" asked the duchess.

Fantomas was filled with emotion by his mistress’ question, but recovered quickly and replied, “Am I not the chief of police? Don’t I know everything?”

The duchess, who was still overwhelmed by the idea of the formidable danger that her lover had just avoided, knelt down at the foot of the bed, in front of the Holy Images and asked, “Would you like us to honor heaven for its clemency in our respect and call on the All-Powerful God to protect Juve?"

And then something happened, something that neither Juve nor Fantomas could ever have imagined seeing one day. Fantomas knelt down, clasped his hands, and pretended to pray to God to protect his enemy. However, as the duchess was praying ardently, Fantomas felt touched to the bottom of his heart and thought, “What Juve did there was really quite clever!”



CHAPTER XX - Underground



It was still night. At the end of the tree-lined Skobeleff Avenue that runs along the Neva in St. Petersburg, a street cleaner seemed to be busily cleaning garbage away. The man, bent over his broom, was attempting to make an enormous pile of waste disappear down a drain inlet that was far too narrow. And he was constantly being interrupted in his work. People appeared out of the shadows and walked over to him, appearing to brush up against him, stopping for a few seconds. It looked like the sweeper would murmur something in their ear, then the people would disappear and the man would continue his work.

Two policemen appeared, their heavy footsteps on the sidewalk troubling the silence of the night.

One of them, seeing the old worker, greeted him politely, “Good evening, Michel.”

The sweeper grumbled, “Good evening. It would be better to say good day, though, since dawn will be here soon. But it’s all the same. Whether it’s night or day, this is hard work!”

“Bah!” said the police officer, as he continued to walk. “It’s either this or something else when you’re not rich.”

“Of course!” grumbled the sweeper. “Of course.”

He watched the policemen for a moment, as they walked off, then continued to grumble, “It’s just that better days will be coming and then those who struggle will rest and those who do nothing right now will work in their place.”

In any case, the sweeper went back to his work and, with a nervous fury pushed the garbage toward the sewer. The officers had just disappeared around a corner when an old woman, who had been hiding behind the trunk of a large tree, walked over to the sweeper.

“Michel, where is the meeting?” she asked in a bitter, grating voice.

The sweeper did not reply. He placed his finger on her lips, indicating that she should remain silent. Then, making sure that the officers had disappeared, he decided to speak.

“You shout too loudly, Marfa Berena! You’ll compromise all of us! Those policemen were chatting with me barely a few seconds ago and cannot be far off.”

It was, in fact, old Marfa Berena who had just walked over to the sweeper.

“By the Holy Images,” she said. “I’m so impatient to get justice that I neglect the most elementary precautions!”

“I know!" replied the sweeper. “I know that you asked for our tribunal to convene. Is it something serious?”

“It's incredible,” the old woman replied, frowning. “I’ll explain everything to you in a bit, along with the others. Tell me, Michel, where are we to meet?”

“You’re almost the last one,” he replied. “All of the others have passed by, on their way to the meeting. Here’s what you must do. Walk down the road to No. 1465. In front of that house, in a nook, there is a metal plate that hides an underground staircase. All you have to do is lift it. Go down the stairs, walk in the darkness, making sure you always stay to the right. You will come across a brave man installing electrical wires in the sewers. Hell say ‘Good evening’ to you and you’ll reply ‘Natacha.’ That’s the password. Then the man will tell you how to go through the labyrinth underneath the city to get to the meeting.”

“Thank you, Michel,” the old woman replied. “Will I see you there in a bit?”

“Yes,” he replied. “I plan to be there.”

Marfa Berena followed the instructions the mysterious man had given her. She lifted the iron plate hiding a staircase, walked down the stairs that led into the entrails of the city. She met the electrician, gave him the password and was taken by the man, after walking about 10 minutes, into a vast, cold, poorly lit room, a true basement, walls dripping with humidity, and buried so deep in the ground that it seemed like some sort of tomb.

That room or rather that cellar, was an old, abandoned quarry that had been covered over when it came time, 25 years earlier, to build the Skobeleff. Most of the engineers who had been involved that project were no longer in St. Petersburg. Some had been sent off to work elsewhere; others had simply died and a few rare ones were municipal employees who had remembered the vast crypt hidden under one of the most important avenues in the capital.

When people stood in the gigantic cave, they noted, not without a certain sense of surprise, that there was a sort of spring at one end where water dripped from the rocky ceiling. When, by chance, a newcomer arrived and asked where the water came from, he would be told that it leaked in from the Neva and that, moreover, the intermittent inhabitants of the sinister place had to work hard to protect it from flooding.

Inside the cave, however, in the light cast by lanterns hanging on the walls, people came and went, people with very different appearances, their social standing obvious from their clothing. Yet they all wore some kind of black veil over their faces.

There were moujiks with trimmed furs, long greatcoats worn at the elbows and back, a few soldiers, civil servants of all kinds, particularly municipal workers.

There were a fair number of women in the room, a few of them young and pretty, others elderly and wretched, poor or disinherited.

When Marfa Berena arrived, she wore no veil and was in no apparent haste to put the black cloth over her face, triggering a flurry of emotion.

People rushed to her sides, asking, “What’s happening?”

The old woman, trembling with emotion, clasped the hands that reached out to her and replied, “You’ll know in a moment. Has Alleluia arrived?”

The pope was there. He came over to join the old woman, clasped her hands and, glancing around him declared, “We must all be here and it is time to start our meeting ”

“Excuse me,” a voice interrupted. “Could you tell us, Alleluia, what happed to the expedition sent out to capture the chief of police in Gatchina? It does not appear that that wretched Boris Pokroff was put to death as it had been decided.”

The pope turned to the speaker and replied, “Providence has its own secret plans and we men cannot always do as we wish. But rest assured brother Boleslas, everything comes to he who waits.”

Boleslas shrugged and went over to a corner to sit down.

Marfa Berena climbed up onto a sort of podium and silence fell over the participants. They knew that she had something important to say, that they had been summoned at her request. They just had to listen to the old woman to find out what was going on.

Pope Alleluia murmured a few words, inviting the people to remain calm and silent. When he had finished, he asked the old woman to explain herself.

“My brothers,” she said in a hoarse voice. You know that a few weeks ago, in order to save my son Vassili from the claws of the police, since they wanted to take him to Siberia, another man, one who had been condemned to death by our tribunal, was released from that sentence as long as he took Vassili’s place and left under his name.” Someone replied, “We remember it clearly, Marfa Berena. That man was not one of our brothers. His name was Jerome Fandor and he was French.”

“That’s not important,” Marfa Berena continued. “Last week, I was quietly sitting in my humble abode and as I labored, since that is what the poor do, I saw two men from the police walking toward me, accompanied by the village mayor. I pretended not to notice anything, but my heart started pounding since I always fear a visit from such people. The mayor spoke to me, saying, ‘Are you Marfa Berena?’ I replied that I was and asked him what he wanted with me. Then one of the policemen stepped forward and asked me where my son Vassili was. I replied that his masters had condemned my son to ten years in Siberia and that his kind had taken him off in the direction of the mines three months earlier. I assured them that I had had no news of my unfortunate son since that time. And I was trembling as I spoke those words since, as you know my friends, Vassili was saved as a result of you and is currently working in a plant that he will blow up one day, but where he is quiet and well paid for the time being.”

“Then the policeman acknowledged that I was telling the truth but told me that he knew more than I did about recent events. He told me that my son in Siberia had broken his chains and escaped. I looked dumbfounded. And I told the three men that by all the Holy Images that could not be possible. I said that my son had ten years to serve and that if he escaped he risked hanging.”

As she recounted these events, the old woman was overcome with emotion. She turned to the pope and, shaking a fist at an imaginary adversary, she shrieked, “So, that’s where things stand. Do you all understand what has happened? That Jerome Fandor that we spared, who we allowed to live as long as he went to Siberia in the place of my son, has escaped from the mines. Since he was passing for Vassili, they’re looking for Vassili now and if they find the real Vassili, my son, they will hang him... Do you understand how anguished I am? Do you realize how much I’m suffering? I regret that Vassili didn’t just head off for the mines. He could have done his ten years then come back. He wasn’t risking a death sentence and now, if they find him, what kind of explanation can he give them? He’ll hang!”

The participants muttered; lively conversations broke out among the nihilists gathered there. After all, Marfa Berena was right and it did seem that Jerome Fandor, who have benefitted from a measure of indulgence, had not recognized the friendship they had shown him. From the time he had stepped into the shoes of Vassili Berena, he had to remain in the Siberian mines for ten years, so that the real Vassili was not disturbed.

“Unfortunately,” someone said, “It’s fine and dandy to lament, but what can we do? We all know, through our friends, brothers, and parents who have been deported, the fate that awaits anyone who escapes. One out of a hundred manages to succeed, the others perish in the steppes, killed by the cold, wolves, hunger. We should presume that the escaped prisoner found death immediately after his departure. So, after all, he has been punished in keeping with God’s

law, but it is regrettable that his death does not serve the interests of a living man. He would have done better to stay...”

The pope sought to impose silence, saying “As our brother said, there is no point weeping over spilt milk; let us look at what we should do.”

Old Marfa Berena got back onto the stool from which she had climbed down and said, “I have a request."

The audience fell silent. The old woman tore off her veil and they were able to see her eyes, shining cruelly in the shadows. Most of the participants also uncovered their faces. In actual fact, this precaution was intended to ensure that no one would recognize anyone else and also to unsettle the police if ever an officer joined a meeting.

Old Marfa saw the impression produced by the grimace on her face and chortled, saying “It looks like you’re afraid of me. Yet, you know I’m not evil. All I’m asking for is justice!”

“So, tell us what you want,” some said impatiently.

The old woman replied, “When you want to heal a wound you look for the cause so that you can treat it. When a river is poisoned, you don’t examine the water at the mouth, but you go back to the source. So, if you want to help me to avenge Vassili, and to save him, we don’t have to consider what is going to happen, but think about what has actually happened!"

“You talk like some obscure book and I don’t understand a thing!" said one of the military men, mouth agape.

Another man, who looked like a municipal civil servant, interrupted, saying, “I understand clearly. Marfa Berena wants us to track down Jerome Fandor."

“No," replied the old woman. “For now, I don’t care what happens to that man. But there is someone who was behind the indulgence that was shown to him. Brothers and sisters, do you remember that woman, Olga, a stranger if I’m not mistaken, who came and begged us to send

Jerome Fandor in my son’s place to the Siberian mines? That woman got what she wanted, and she made fools of you all. Naturally, as soon as her protege left for the mines, she thought of only one thing: getting away, telling him to flee, without giving a thought to what would happen to my son, not caring that as soon as Jerome Fandor, the man passing for my son in the mines, escaped, the police would be looking for my son. That woman betrayed us and I demand that she be judged!”

Marfa Berena’s declarations were met with icy silence. In principle, the nihilists did not like disputes and internal wars, but it seemed to all as if the old woman was right.

Boleslas stood up and said, “This proves, my brothers and sisters, that we are always punished by what we preach. You showed yourselves to be indulgent and generous with respect to one of our adversaries but in fact you were weak and this is the punishment! As a result of your attitude one of our brothers, and one of the best at that, Vassili, is currently sought by the police, while his mother laments. Perhaps they're arresting him right now! If things go like that, Vassili will be dead by nightfall. And who is really responsible for that murder? You, my friends, you who were weak enough to let the man you had sentenced to death live!”

Boleslas’ words were welcomed enthusiastically.

“Bravo! He’s right!" the participants shouted, making such a din that Alleluia’s efforts to obtain silence were in vain.

“Judgment! Judgment!” they cried. “The person responsible is that woman, that Olga... We must capture her..."

The pope waved his hand, indicating that all of the masks, all of the veils covering faces were to be removed. Then, as if taking part in a drill, the men went to stand along the wall, side by side, lined up like soldiers. The women did the same. Armed with a torch, Pope Alleluia strode up and down the ranks of this strange group, examining each face.

He stopped in front of a woman and said, “I think I recognize you.”

The woman took a step forward. She was pretty, her face was a bit pale, but her eyes were extraordinarily bright. Her appearance, elegant, fine and distinguished, stood out in contrast to the rough, heavy look of the people around her.

She said to the pope, “I’m Olga... I came to you, don’t forget, at the request of Natacha, who gave me the golden case.”

The pope seized the opportunity to question the woman known as Olga, who was in actual fact Helene.

“How did you get that golden case, which belonged to Natacha, the daughter of Boris Pokroff?”

Helene replied sharply, “I already told you Alleluia that I could not tell you about that. It doesn’t matter how the golden case came into my possession, as long as I didn’t steal it and it didn’t come to me as a result of a crime!”

Everyone had remained silent during this conversation. Old Marfa Berena who could hold still no longer rushed over to Helene and, threatening her with a fist, grumbled, “In any case, if my son Vassili is hanged, no one will say that you were not responsible for his death! It will be all your fault. In order to save a man who must be your lover you sent him off to Siberia in

Vassili’s place so that my son would be punished harshly!”

This interpretation of the facts was profoundly inaccurate, since when they had suggested to Marfa Berena that Fandor be sent off to the mines instead of her son, she had applauded the offer with both hands.

Helene realized that any discussion was impossible, and merely shrugged. Moreover, the young woman had sacrificed her existence. She bitterly regretted having returned to this wasps’ nest of nihilists, when nothing had required her to do so. In fact, since the day when she had saved Fandor, Helene had left St. Petersburg. Her goal had been to join Juve to find out where he was

hidden. She had also sought to unmask Fantomas, but the young woman’s efforts had been in vain and she had been unable to get to any of the places where she thought she would find the people she was so ardently looking for.

Changing her plans, Helene decided to go to the mines in Siberia and share Fandor’s unfortunate fate. Of course, she’d had no time to talk with him. Of course, she was more and more convinced that Fandor had betrayed her and that, caught in the net of the beautiful Natacha, he had fallen madly in love with the other woman.

In any case, regardless of how Fandor felt about her, she was now resolved to take back the man who was her husband, with all her soul and heart. She had saved him once and now she had to save him a second time! So, she had set off for Siberia, but on her way she had learned that the prisoner Vassili had escaped.

Helene knew what that meant.

If the prisoner Vassili, namely Fandor, had escaped, he was far away by now. Would he stay in Russia? Would he set off for another country? For France? Helene did not know. So, abandoning her plans to go to Siberia, she had returned to St. Petersburg and fell back into the midst of the nihilists, the only place where she was known, and helped, since she had introduced herself with the golden case once owned by Natacha.

Moreover, Helene had to fulfill her mission.

Had she not promised to watch over the Empress’ treasure and to do her best to keep Fantomas from stealing the priceless necklace?

When she had returned to St. Petersburg, Helene had hoped to see Fandor again, to meet Juve once and for all. That would enable her to play a more useful role in the battle against Fantomas who, certainly, would make the most of the free time they had given him to come up with the most audacious plans, to prepare the most incredible skirmishes.

After learning that a secret meeting was to be held a few days later, in the sinister and mysterious caves hidden under the Neva. Helene went there, filled with hope. And now she realized how horribly the situation had turned against her. She felt forced to admit, in advance, that she was lost.

In fact, the unfortunate woman found herself in an impossible situation and the events swirled about her with implacable logic. As a result of Fandor’s escape, the authorities were looking for Vassili and the real prisoner would eventually be discovered and they would realize that he had been replaced when he was sent off to the mines. As someone at the meeting had said, what was to be done? What had happened had happened.

Moreover, Helene had quite another concern. She’d heard, during the meeting, that anyone who managed to escape the mines in Siberia most certainly exchanged captivity for death. Anyone fleeing from the guards inevitably fell victim to the cold, hunger or wolves.

So Fandor had to be dead. Fandor’s fate must have been the same as that of anyone who escaped. And if that were so, there was no point in Helene living if Fandor was no longer in the world. So, wishing to hasten her end, Helene shrieked in anger and despair and fiercely said, “After all, your stupid judgments and idiot courts are of no importance to me! Do with me as you will! Rest assured that I despise people like you who criticize the organizations of civil society and who, nevertheless, rush off to create their own courts, judges, jailers and executioners... Give me death without any further trial!”

Inarticulate shouting hid Helene’s voice, growing and growing in the cave, despite the frightened shouts of the pope, as he said, “Silence! Silence! We’ll make so much noise that the police will come!”

Men rushed over to Helene. Boleslas was the most enraged. He took the young woman by the arms and, with a sudden jerk, threw her to the ground and forced her to her knees.

“You wretch,” he shouted. “You think you can die without a judgment, without a trial? Fine. All I want to do is spill your aristocratic, treacherous blood since I guessed who you were from the start. I clearly saw that you were not one of us. Oh, you can bravely spit out your anger. In just a while you'll be like all of those who have been punished before you. You’ll scream in pain and beg for mercy. But it will be too late. I want them to hand you over to me! I’ll make you die bit by bit. It will last for hours and you’ll suffer incredibly.”

Helene remained hunched over, her arms twisted by the blood-thirsty man who was already preparing to take his dagger out of his pocket. But suddenly he moaned and collapsed to the ground. Someone had struck him in the forehead with such forced that he had toppled over and lost consciousness.

The man who had struck him then leapt out from the middle of the crowd where he had gone unnoticed. He grabbed a stool and, arms windmilling about, he cleared a space around Helene in order to protect her.

“You wretched dogs!” he shouted. “You, who claim to be more just than the imperial justice, are you not ashamed of torturing a woman. Try to live up to your stands. You’re not nihilists. You’re not worthy of that name. You’re nothing more than wild cats, rats or snakes.”

The young man’s energetic words turned the audience around.

“He’s right,” someone murmured. “We shouldn’t kill, not even our enemies, without a judgment. We have to take this woman before the Tribunal!”

But the man continued to shout, to the amazement of all, saying “You won’t take her before the Tribunal alone. You will take me too and I only hope you treat me the way you want to treat her. She’s the one who saved your prisoner, Fandor, from death by sending him to the mines in Siberia. Fandor escaped and even came back. He stands before you. I’m Fandor!”

And as he uttered those words, Helene stopped shivering, stood up and looked him in the eyes.

“Fandor!” she said.

And the young man, overcome with emotion, opened his arms to the young woman who fell on him sobbing. The spouses, the eternal lovers, had found one another and joined in a long kiss in the face of death.

The death, in fact, was imminent since, once their initial astonishment had passed, the crowd turned angry.

What, this man who had just intervened was none other than the man they had spared one time, that they had sent off to Siberia in Vassili’s place, instead of putting him to death, and who had returned that favor by escaping and putting Vassili into such danger! And now he had come back to face the judges! He deserved no pity!

Metal flashes shone out in the darkness of the cave. Almost all the revolvers had been taken out of the pockets where they had been kept. The meeting, which had started in discussion, was about to end in a bloody massacre. Already Boleslas, brought back to life by the care of an old woman next to him, was inciting his companions to take vengeances.

“Shoot!" he screamed. “Shoot and finish these wretches off!”

The sound of guns being armed filled the space. All of the nihilists had withdrawn into the depths of the cave, leaving Helene and Fandor facing them, standing along the wall, indifferent to their surroundings, arms entwined, hugging tightly, face to face, lips to lips. Their last moment was upon them and, without trembling, happy to be reunited, they waited for death...

Pope Alleluia’s intervention postponed that moment. With difficulty, the religious man shoved the crowd aside and stood between the revolvers and the intended victims.

“Stop! Stop!” he shouted. “If you do this, if you assassinate these people, you will be covered with shame and dishonor.”

“That doesn’t matter,” someone replied. “They deserve death...”

“They must be judged first!” the pope said harshly. “And if you do not do that, God’s wrath will fall on you in a rain of curses.”

That threat seemed to have a certain effect on the audience and the pope continued, saying “Like you, I believe that an exemplary punishment is required and that it must be rigorously determined. But, the harsher the sentence it is, the more important it is that we follow the rules. My friends, today, we have a guest that we have called to our aid to help us get rid of the man who has discredited us so much, so that he can capture Fantomas. This man, this policeman, the famous Juve is in the room today and is taking part in our deliberations. What do you believe this good man will think of us if we behave like this in his presence?”

The pope’s words stilled the fierce crowd. The name of the famous and popular Juve had traveled by word of mouth and was on everyone’s lips. But, of course, no one was more surprised by this revelation than Helene and Fandor.

Although they were prepared for anything, they had never expected this. They had never imagined that Juve could appear at the very moment when they were counting the final seconds of their existence. Joy flashed over their faces. The two young people, who had bravely accepted their fate, were filled with hope at the idea they would live.

They went from one extreme to the other since, although it was wonderful to know that Juve was there with them, there was no guarantee that the policeman would be able to save them.

However, the pope continued to speak, “I’ve been speaking with this honorable policeman about the situation of the two accused that we are about to judge... First, Juve did not want to meddle in our affairs but, at my insistence, he agreed to preside over our tribunal, which will meet any time now. We will respect the sentence he renders after consulting the audience, won’t we?”

The astonishment provoked by the pope’s words suddenly transformed into frantic enthusiasm. Juve’s name was well-known and all the nihilists loved him. Many of them, who had lived in Paris, were familiar with the man’s reputation for bravery and loyalty. They knew that he had come, simply and bravely, at the first appeal from the nihilists. They were convinced that he would serve them loyally in searching for and capturing Fantomas, as he had promised.

“Let Juve preside over the hearing and we will carry out the sentence,” people in the room shouted.

People in the room bustled about, picking up a few ladders, making a desk, a table where Juve would sit. What did the policeman plan? It was impossible to tell by looking at his face.

The accused had been positioned in front of him, two lanterns shining on their faces. Juve had stared at them, first one and then the other, without blinking, with giving the slightest hint that he knew the couple.

Helene and Fandor, moreover, had realized that it was essential for them not to give the impression they knew Juve.

The investigation started.

“Do you acknowledge the facts for which you have been accused?” Juve asked, seeming visibly concerned and not just trying to save time.

Helene and Fandor had decided how they should behave and for close to 30 minutes, they talked with the unusual man presiding over the supreme tribunal, getting lost in insignificant details. Juve helped them in this, wanting only one thing, to extend the debates in the hope that it would have to be put off to another time.

Initially, the audience did not notice this strategy. But, over time, people started to lose patience and Boleslas suddenly interrupted Juve, shouting loudly, “None of this matters. What matters is we get on with this. Are the two accused guilty or not? If they are, don’t they deserve death since death is the only sentence the nihilist tribunal can render?”

Juve tried to alleviate the considerable effect produced by this declaration.

“The nihilists’ tribunal is better yet than an impartial and free tribunal,” he said. “When it condemns, it can obviously render a death sentence. But it can also absolve, acquit!”

This unfortunate pronouncement was greeted by shouting in the cavern. Boleslas walked over to Juve, waved his fist at the policeman, and roared, “Our tribunal is nothing but play-acting and you know it. People wanted to respect the formalities for sentencing Fandor and Olga. Well those formalities have been respected. Since you're presiding, sentence them!"

Juve look desperately around him, trying to find some support, but no one seemed to understand him. The crowd grew belligerent, spurred on by Boleslas’ words.

“Sentence them, sentence them!" they shouted.

Hearing these ferocious cries and realizing that those the crowd wanted to put to death were none other than Helene and Fandor, namely the two people he loved most in the world, he saw red... for a moment, he considered taking out his revolver, motioning for Helene to stand next to him, and defending them until their last drop of blood, but he regained control of himself.

Acting like that would certainly condemn them all to death. Juve, even in the most desperate circumstances, always kept hope, believing that as long as the body held a spark of life there was a smidgen of hope!

Acting like that would merely precipitate the fatal end. It was essential, since they had started out by respecting the rules, respect those rules until the very end, and in that way gain time.

“Sentence them, sentence them!” the crowd shouted.

Juve realized that it would be impossible to render any other sentence and that he would be disavowed, that he would see those he was trying to save murdered before his very eyes.

To the astonishment of Helene and Fandor, who heard Juve speak without understanding their friend's intentions, the policeman uttered the fatal words, saying “Following the debate, which was conducted in due form, the head of the nihilists court sentences his brother Fandor and his sister Olga to death!”

This decision was greeted with shouting and applause. Yet silence fell yet again since the judge had not finished speaking. He still had to state how the punishment would be enacted.

“The condemned will be hanged! The execution will take place at this time tomorrow!” he said, in an authoritarian and energetic voice.



CHAPTER XXI - Juve’s Trickery



It had been about one hour since Juve had sentenced Helene and Fandor to death. The crowd of nihilists who had been summoned to the meeting which had ended so tragically, had almost entirely departed from the secret cave, in which the most ardent and most notorious members of the formidable group of government adversaries.

These people, who practiced various professions, could not, in fact, stay away from their work for long. Workers, employees, soldiers or civil servants... they had to perform their duties. Juve was counting on just that when, completely by chance and in order to gain time, he had set the date and time for the horrible sentence, which he had found himself forced to pronounce, having done so solely in order to keep Helene and Fandor from being murdered immediately by the crowd of nihilists who were exasperated by the young couple’s attitude.

Yet, since the execution could not take place before the next morning, those who were sentenced to death would be guarded carefully until that time.

As soon as the sentence was pronounced, the most ferocious of the nihilists had volunteered to guard the prisoners until the time of their execution. And, before Juve could intervene, or even exchange a few words with the unfortunate victims, they had been separated and dragged off, Fandor to one end of the cave and Helene to the opposite one. Then, their guards had taken up position around them and it was clear they intended to remain them until the sentence was executed.

Juve was uncertain as to how he should behave. He clearly saw that Fandor and Helene would have wanted to speak with him since the two young people, most astonished and then overcome by their fate, would have wanted to know, before dying, how it had come about that Juve had been the supreme judge of the tribunal that was to judge them and why he had felt obliged to sentence them to death. And while Fandor and Helene were overcome with curiosity, to the point that they forgot about the sad fate that awaited them, Juve was every bit as curious.

The previous night, he had met the nihilists for the first time, after being miraculously rescued from a hideous death by the Duchess Ekaterina. A gallant man, Juve had in turn saved her from certain death while also saving her lover from the nihilists' attack. Following that, Juve had been obliged to accompany the nihilists and he returned to St. Petersburg with the aid and protection of Pope Alleluia, an extraordinary man, a veritable visionary, who incarnated both the desire for murder and the principles of religion, unable to understand, despite his thorough knowledge of sacred texts, that one thing above all is intangible and respectable: life!

Juve had quickly earned the pope’s trust and Alleluia, who never given up, who developed the most extraordinary plans with the policeman for tracking down Fantomas, had invited Juve to the famous cave under the Neva that evening, to attend the nihilist’s meeting scheduled to take place at dawn.

Juve had no further intention of getting involved in the intimate existence of such formidable people, he did not want to know or have to keep their secrets and he had no desire, in the event of a surprise, of being arrested by the regular police for plotting against the life of the Tsar, the man he was actually supposed to protect. Juve merely believed that, by going to see the nihilists, he might have a chance of hearing Fantomas speak, if not actually meeting him.

But the turn of events had dumbfounded the policeman when he suddenly found himself in the cave facing the two people he had been searching for in vain for several weeks, without finding the slightest trace. Juve had found Helene and Fandor!

He was about to walk over to them, to make himself known and ask what had happened to them when the meeting started with the recriminations of old Marfa Berena and Juve’s joy had immediately transformed into mortal anguish and frightening concern.

He did not understand that the famous Olga everyone was hurling abuse at was actually Helene. And he had no idea why Fandor had set off for the mines in Siberia in the place of Vassili, the old woman’s son, but he was very certain that his poor friends were in a most unique situation and that all they could hope for was that they would not be murdered right away.

To make matters worse, Pope Alleluia had asked Juve to judge the accused and Juve understood that this formality was just a comedy and that if he did not render a sentence in keeping with the crowd's wishes, the execution would still take place.

That is why Juve rendered his sentence and declared that the execution would only take place the next morning. He hoped that, within 24 hours, he would manage to save Helene and Fandor...

As the guards were keeping the pair clearly in view and the crowd was slowly dissipating, all agreeing to return the next day, Pope Alleluia took Juve aside.

“My dear friend,” he declared, “There’s no need for us here. Moreover, we have to come to an agreement about tracking down Fantomas... I’m sure you realize that the nihilists’ organization is the most powerful one in the civilized world right now. As I already explained, we are men of justice, not wrong-doers. We support death without failing, but we cannot accept people spreading ignominious rumors about us, saying that the nihilist steal or kill for riches like vulgar robbers. No! Our victims are not true victims. The people we execute are justly sentenced. For some time now, there have been many thefts and crimes in which money disappears. Fantomas is responsible for such evil deeds. The rumor has spread, in the population that the nihilists wanted to steal the precious jewels of the Tsar's wife... The nihilists don’t want that, but Fantomas is the one planning this heist and is trying to make us take the blame for it. And, in order to avoid that, Juve, we called you. Time is of the essence. Since we have the day before us, would you like to study the problem with me, to find a plan for taking care of Fantomas?”

Juve hardly wanted to take care of Fantomas that very day, believing that he did not have nearly enough time before the execution to find a way to save his friends.

“Later," he said to the pope. “Later we’ll have an opportunity to talk!”

Ingenuously, Alleluia declared, “You have a few hours free and I would have preferred to spend them with you. But it that does not suit you, too bad!”

The Pope and Juve had arrived at the entrance to the sewer hallway through which light filtered in. In a low voice, the Pope told Juve, “That’s how we get in and out. The sewer worker, Michel, serves as a doorman for us...”

Alleluia shook the policeman’s hand and added, in a confidential tone, “I am counting on you to attend the execution of the two criminals tomorrow. It is common practice among us for the judge to make sure that his orders are executed.”

Juve shivered and said nothing,

Alleluia continued, “I’ll be in the cave as of 2:00. I have to say the usual prayers. At three o’clock we’ll hang them.”

And with those words, the pope walked away from Juve and, without a thought as to what would happen to the policeman, he exited the sewer, walking up the staircase that led to the Skobeleff.

Juve turned heel and quickly walked back the way he had come. He was extremely agitated and wondered how he would manage to save his friends. All in all, it was a very simple matter. Juve had, in fact, turned back to note the exact route he would have to take to get from the road to the quarry in which the nihilists would gather, in just a few hours, to witness the executions.

Although the very idea disgusted him, Juve had decided that he would notify the police and have everyone arrested. Juve was noting the details of the route in his notebook when suddenly a robust, massive silhouette stepped in front of him. He stepped aside to let the man pass and quickly hid his notebook in his pocket. The individual, however, stopped and stared at him.

“Well,” he said after a moment. “It’s the judge from earlier. Good evening comrade.”

“Good evening,” Juve replied, frowning, since he had just recognized the person who had been among the most vociferous when demanding the execution of Helene and Fandor.

It was Boleslas.

The man was carrying a long piece of wood and, with a ferocious smile, he waved it at Juve and said, “You see, comrade, we don’t waste time!”

“I don’t understand,” said Juve looking at the piece of wood with an instinctive terror.

Boleslas chortled and said, “I’m carrying a piece of the gallows. We’re about to set it up in the very center of the room and we’ll use it tomorrow morning!”

Juve jumped. So, this wretch was going to add to the horror faced by Helene and Fandor, by setting up the instrument of their death several hours ahead of time.

Juve could not keep from shouting, “But that’s abominable!”

Boleslas, however, shrugged and continued on his way, muttering, “I don’t trust that man.”

Juve followed him from a distance and, for close to two hours, he wandered through the secret corridors of the underground sewers that ran along the famous quarry, under the Neva. Juve had prepared a very detailed and complete plan of the premises and he was quite pleased with the idea that, in all likelihood, he would be able to bring an entire army of policemen into the labyrinth without anyone knowing until such times as they rushed the nihilists and prevented the execution of his two friends.

Juve voluntarily abstained from entering the quarry, fearing that he would betray some sympathy for Helene and Fandor. After completing his arrangements, he walked back towards the exit, stopping at an intersection along the way to fine-tune his plans.

“We will have to position six officers here ” he thought, as he wrote the number 6 in his notebook followed by the word “officers”.

Just then, a loud voice shouted and an enormous wrist threatened to strike Juve on the head. He had barely enough time to step back before turning around and finding himself face to face with the man who, a few hours earlier, had announced that he was carrying the gallows.

“You again!” said Juve “What do you want?”

Boleslas dragged Juve into an underground corner. He approached him hands clenched, and hissed, “Do you think I’m as stupid as I look, as stupid as all those around me? Do you think I haven’t seen you coming and going, that I don’t realize that you’re going to betray us? I know why you’ve been surveying all these underground passages. It’s so you can bring the police in and save those damned foreigners that you only condemned because you had to! Fortunately, I was watching. I’m telling you two things. First, you won’t be leaving here until the execution is over. In that case, you won’t be able to warn the police and you won’t post six at the intersection as you’ve planned to do. Second, I’ve demolished the communication system that enabled people inside to call Michel, the sewer man, to have him open up. From now on, people can come in but no one can get out.”

Juve listened, distraught, as Boleslas spoke. What would become of him? What would he do? Was the game over?

“One thing is certain,” Juve thought, filled with an icy anger, “Within ten minutes one of us will have defeated the other since we can’t both remain standing here. But that won’t save Helene and Fandor!”

Boleslas, however, grew more and more animated as he spoke, “You tried to trick us, you wretch, but you’re the one who will lose. I’ll tell our friends and will have a third hanging tomorrow morning. You!”

Calmly, coldly, Juve continued to say nothing. He was thinking, trying to decide what attitude he should adopt and how he could get out of this situation. Boleslas took his silence for resignation and fear.

In a cheerful voice, he added, “After all, I should have let you come in with your policemen. They would be dead as well. The only reason I spared them is that their deaths would have caused the deaths of most of our members!”

Since Juve, despite everything, was staring at Boleslas, eyes filled with astonishment, the man explained, “You see, you wretched traitor, these underground vaults are not only controlled by the entrance at which old Michel stands guard, but the tumultuous Neva flowing over head, kept out by a simple valve... Did you notice the small metal doors here and there in the walls? They open onto the river. If one or two are opened, the caves will fill... If you had arrived with the police, I would have opened these doors. I have the key. And everyone would have drowned.”

This time, Juve understood and, taking advantage of a momentary lack of attention on the part of Boleslas, Juve rushed the other man, grabbed him by the throat and started to throttle him.

“Help! Help” the nihilist said.

But Juve had rushed him so violently that he held him still. Boleslas resisted less and less and, half strangled, lost consciousness. It took Juve no more than a minute to tie him up firmly, and push him into a dark corner of the deserted underground. Feverishly, the policeman dug through Boleslas’ pockets. He took out a wallet in which he found a key.

Filled with joy at this discovery, Juve shouted, “Dying for death’s sake, we will die defending our existence!’’

In his hand, Juve held the key that could be used to open the doors and flood the underground case with water from the Neva. Indiscreetly, Juve glanced at the papers in Boleslas’ wallet. He could not contain his surprise. Written in red ink in a corner of the wallet, he had discovered a name, a name that certainly belonged to Boleslas, a name that, despite everything, made the policeman shiver with emotion. Juve had just discovered that the ardent nihilist was none other than a close relative of the Tsar!

The pope, wearing his religious attire, stood mournfully in the middle of the room in which the prisoners Helene and Fandor had been held overnight. In the centre of the quarry he had set up a sort of table on which he had placed colorful images and a variety of small objects. He had had two large candles carried in and was preparing to light them when, suddenly, someone touched his shoulder. The pope turned around, indignant.

“Who dares place a sacrilegious hand on a priest wearing his sacerdotal vestments?”

It was Juve who had touched the pope. Alleluia recognized him.

“Ah, there you are,” he said. “That’s fine. I was afraid that you would not attend the executions and the ceremony that is to precede them. I’m pleased that you came. As for the rest, you’ll see, it’s interesting...”

Up to this moment, an hour after midnight, Juve had never shown his face in the vicinity of the prisoners, who were looking at him. Yet, he had not wasted his time and, judging by his weary look and his dirty, torn clothing, he’d been hard at work throughout his absence. What had happened to him? After looking at him from head to toe and noticing that his clothes were stained with mud and torn in many places, the pope naively asked him just that.

“None of your business!" said Juve. “Am I not a free man?”

“Of course!” said the pope, raising his arms. “It's fine to want to do things in a normal manner, but everything is always poorly organized. That Boleslas, who’d volunteered to set up the gallows... well he brought the wood but he didn’t assemble it. I don’t know what happened to him. He must be dead drunk in some bar somewhere!”

“That’s highly likely,” said Juve, who recalled this Boleslas and knew full well that as he spoke with the pope Boleslas was tied up and hidden in a dark corner of a passageway where no one would ever think to look for him.

The pope paced back and forth, agitated, and said, “The comrades will start arriving soon. We have to be ready to execute the convicts, as soon as they get here. We can move the executions up in order to get done with this. It will take me just a few minutes to say my mass.”

“Your mass?” asked Juve. “What mass?”

The pope seemed stunned by his question and replied, “Oh, the French are such an impious people. Have you not noticed my clothing, Juve? I’m wearing my sacerdotal vestments and I had set this table up like an altar in order to say the mass for the dead...”

“My God!” Juve said, as he realized the purpose of the sinister instrument placed in the middle of the room. He guessed the purpose of the candles that were being lit. The nihilists were about to add to the tortures of the unfortunate wretches they planned to execute. This abominable pope was going to say the mass of the dead before them. ... They were going to hear the De Profundis said on their behalf!

Was there any way Juve could oppose this ceremony? No, that would be impossible!

“After all,” he said, repressing his feelings,

“That will give us more time.”

The pope was already kneeling before the altar, in the weak light cast by the two candles.

Helene and Fandor, torn from the drowsiness into which they had slipped, grew fearful as they witnessed the preparations. They realized what was happening and they understood that, once the mass had been pronounced, they would certainly be executed.

Although they could not touch one another, they could hear. Helene cried out, expressing all her tenderness, all her love, saying “Farewell Fandor.”

Fandor replied, “Farewell Helene!”

But a third voice rose over the silence and the semi-darkness, clearly saying, “Be brave children, don’t despair!”

Who could have said those words?

The pope, who had been praying, stopped immediately, stunned, as he heard the words. But he saw no one in the room apart from the guards, apart from himself, apart from old Marfa Berena who, assisted by another ancient shrew, was attempting to set up the scaffold that Boleslas had abandoned.

“Be brave!” the voice had said.

Helene and Fandor suddenly felt as if they had been electrified, since they recognized the voice. It was none other than Juve.

People were swarming into the room. Nihilists appeared from everywhere and the pope, rushing through the ceremony was about to finish up when suddenly he was interrupted in his prayers.

He was kneeling in front of the altar and grumbled furiously, in a low voice, because he did not want to look as if he’d interrupted.

“What is that? What does it want with me?"

He heard someone speaking with him, speaking from the other side of the altar, someone who was certainly hidden under the black sheet, littered with the silver tears he had thrown there.

“How much longer are you going to take?" the voice asked the pope.

Alleluia realized that it was Juve speaking.

“No more than five minutes, then we’ll hang them!" he declared.

To his great surprise, Juve retorted, “That's too fast. Your ceremony has to last another fifteen minutes!”

“But it won’t take me more than five minutes to finish the mass,” declared the pope.

“So, make your prayers longer,” Juve suggested.

“But that’s impossible,” said the pope.

“In the name of God!” the policeman shouted, in exasperation. “As sure as my name is Juve, I’ll strangle you this very minute if you don’t make your mass for the dead last another quarter of an hour!”

“I’m dealing with a mad man,” thought the pope, terrified, as he continued to mutter his prayers. Yet he could not disobey Juve.

“Fine!" he said. “I can’t extend my mass, but I can start it over. “

“Good!” Juve said, satisfied, as he continued to hide under the black sheet.

He slipped the barrel of his revolver through a tear in the sheet and as the pope started his De Profundis over again and he said, “Don’t stop, continue without interruption. If you end before I tell you to stop, I’ll shoot you right away!”

But why would Juve want to make the ceremony last longer?

The pope did not understand.

He started his mass over a second time. A quarter of an hour passed and Juve ordered him to start over a third time.

The pope was distraught.

“Honestly,” he thought while muttering his prayers. “It’s impossible to conduct a mass under these circumstances. I’ve never seen anything like this and I’m convinced I’m not saying my prayers properly, upset as I am by that gun pointing at me!”

Catching his breath, Alleluia begged Juve, “I beg of you. Let me be. Let us hang the guilty and get it over with. I can’t start my mass over again a fourth time...”

The pope heard no reply, but a frightful shriek rang out from all directions. The nihilists in the room had leapt up and were shouting in terror, “The Neva! The Neva!”

At the same time, a cold, damp wave suddenly swept over the congregation. Water sloshed over the ground that had been dry until then, and suddenly flowed in.

The initial moment of surprise over, the nihilists understood without a doubt and cried out.

“We’re being flooded! The underground caves are filling with water from the Neva! We’ll all going to die. We’ll drown!”

The water had been flowing in for some time without anyone noticing and now suddenly rushed into the large room. A section of the wall had collapsed under the pressure of the water and it now rushed in with the violence of a whirlpool. Within the space of a second, the pope’s altar had been carried away. Darkness fell in the room and the screams that had announced the cataclysms had been replaced with moans of pain, the cries of the dying.

What frightening coincidence, what tragic will had caused the river to invade the nihilists’ underground chamber?



CHAPTER XXII - Mysterious Disappearance



Seventy-five brothers and sisters, members of the group of nihilists, once headed by the defunct Natacha, had just been washed under the metal plate that hid the staircase leading to the sewers and from there to the quarry carved under the bed of the Neva River.

Old Michel who, in keeping with his duties and habits, had come on duty at one o’clock in the morning on Skobeleff Avenue, had managed to let all of these people into this world in the entrails of the city without anyone being noticed by the police officers who patrolled the neighborhood.

Once the 75 members of the fierce association of nihilists had descended into the underground passageway and Brother Michel was convinced that no one else was coming, he closed the door and locked it with a special key.

“They'll figure out how to get out on their own,” he thought to himself, completely unaware that Boleslas had demolished the device that served to open the entrance from the inside and that no one would be able to get out of the sewers until he returned.

Michel felt some regret as he walked off. Not only was he somewhat concerned because, despite all his precautions, he had noticed suspicious shadows in the distance, but he was also saddened by the idea that serious, important, tragic things would be happening that morning and he would not be there to witness them.

“They’re going to hang people this morning,” he repeated over and over. “They’re going to hang people this morning and I won’t be there...”

During the course of his long career as a nihilist, Michel had attended many executions. He was familiar with all forms of death, having witnessed them. He had seen a man die after his chest had been riddled with dagger blows; he’d seen gagged women strangled, he’d seen men of all ages hanged... And despite all that, the old nihilist experienced a bloodthirsty sense of regret whenever he missed one of those spectacles. He dreamed of being an executioner and, on this day, when his work duties kept him from being in the quarry with his comrades, he envied Boleslas, saying “He’s the one who will hang the traitors... He’ll place the ropes over their heads and will take them down once they’re stiff and cold. He’s so lucky!”

Of course, Michel had no idea that, at that very moment, Boleslas was writhing about on the floor, filled with the most violent anger, unable to undo his bonds or to tear off the gag that prevented him from calling for help.

So, old Michel was walking off, filled with regret, when he suddenly stopped in the middle of the road to listen. It was still very early in the morning. The sun was barely peaking over the horizon and, in the silence of the night, Michel heard a strange, long sound, a sort of sinister grumbling of unknown origin.

“What’s going on?” he asked.

Instinctively, he walked over to a sewer grate beneath a sidewalk. He knelt down in front of it and listened again. The most profound expression of amazement washed over the face of the old nihilist. He knew that the sewer grate in front of him connected to a pipe that, after many twists and turns, ended up in a large underground room where, at that very moment, his companions were about to execute the traitors. And Michel had the impression that a sort of anguished clamor was rising up toward him, hidden by some strange, powerful, continuous noise he could not identify.

“What can that be?” he asked himself again.

Suddenly, the street cleaner struck his hand against his forehead and said, “For God’s sake! I know what it is, but I don’t understand. It’s like water boiling... and yet that can’t be!”

An imperious, harsh clamor called out in the distance.

People were calling, “Michel! Michel!”

The street cleaner stood up. He looked at the horizon, at the far end of Skobeleff Avenue and saw no one.

“That’s curious,” he said. “I could have sworn...”

Suddenly he fell silent. An automobile suddenly appeared on a side street, turned quickly and rapidly came to a stop next to him. A young, elegant man wearing a green tunic stepped out of the car. It was one of the municipal engineers, the district deputy manager of sewers, Michel’s supervisor. The engineer appeared to be overcome with an unspeakable rage. He walked over to the old nihilist, grabbed him by the shoulders and shook him so brutally that the old man fell to the ground.

“By the Holy Images and the Little Father,” old Michel muttered. “What is happening to me?

What did I ever do to you, Mr. Engineer, to be treated like this?”

“Wretch,” shrieked the district deputy manager. “Have you no idea what’s happening?”

Michel turned pale. He feared that he’d been discovered, an hour earlier, when he was letting the nihilists into the underground tunnels.

He tried his hand at luck and said, “I know nothing, I saw nothing...”

Furiously, the engineer replied, “You may be blind but deaf you’re not!”

“What do you mean sir?” replied Michel, as he painfully got back to his feet, stumbling like a drunkard.

Exasperated with the man’s attitude, the engineer boomed, “Didn’t you hear anything? Don’t you hear anything?”

“No, by the Holy Images,” Michel swore.

The engineer grabbed him, shook him again and said, “Imbecile! Moujik! I’ll tell you what’s happening then! A blunder has been made. Either that or a crime has been committed. The valves in the underground sewer that runs along the Neva were opened, barely an hour ago. The water seeped in gradually and now it is flooding the basement since the wall must have cracked. I’ve just come from the office, you know where it is, next to the first set of locks. The floor collapsed suddenly and was replaced by a flood of boiling water and it didn’t take us long, those of who are familiar with the lay-out of the basement, to figure out what was going on. It’s crazy! It’s mad! In an hour, if no miracle occurs, all of the sewers in the neighborhood will be under water. It will, be a catastrophe. Houses will collapse, foundations will be destroyed and, who knows, maybe even the course of the Neva River will be changed! And to top it all off, I will be held legally responsible. I should kill myself right now!”

However, the engineer, having pulled his revolver out of his belt, was not aiming it at himself. He looked Michel straight in the eyes and said, “But before I die I want to know if you’re responsible as well. Did you keep a close eye on the valves? Did you check, as the regulations state, that they were closed last night? I’m convinced you didn’t...”

Michel looked at his superior, his face haggard. No, of he hadn’t checked the valves. He never checked them and there had never been an accident before. Moreover, he didn’t care if the sewers were flooded or not. But he was devastated by the thought that, just as the flood was occurring, 75 of his brothers and sisters were locked inside the underground cave. That was terrible, horrible! They would all die, suffocated, drowned...

Suddenly a terrible anger washed through the old nihilist. He looked at his superior and, in a strange voice he bellowed, Tm not responsible for the accident that’s happening, but I’m pleased about it. It’s heavenly vengeance against civilization... This will teach you, you engineers, those who want to confine nature and its invincible forces in your narrow and pusillanimous walls. When nature gets fed up, she makes an effort and all your puny narrowminded, man-made, structures are swept away by divine power. So much the better if the course of the Neva River has just been changed! Let’s hope that it will carry away all the masters and supervisors, that it will drag the Tsars and their servants to the distant sea!”

“Wretch!” shrieked the engineer, dumbfounded by this declaration. “Have you suddenly gone mad or are you a...”

He stopped as Michel once again bellowed, “I’m one of those who desire the destruction of everything! I’m one of those who want to see the world end and who will only be satisfied when the last man has given up his wretched soul to the god who tempted him with its presumptuousness and vanity. I’m a nihilist. Do you get me? And if I’m emotional, if I weep, it’s because in the midst of the water boiling under our feet, at this very moment, 100 of my brothers and sisters are rendering their healthy, proper justice and planning reprisals. Unfortunately, at this very moment they may already be victims, cadavers. But that doesn’t matter! Others will come after them...”

Michel stopped speaking, took a step back, shrieked loudly, then fell backwards, screaming, “Damnation!”

On the ground, his body twisted and writhed than fell motionless as blood from a gaping wound in his throat.

As soon as he realized what the man was, the district sub-manager of sewers had aimed his revolver at Michel and shot him down like a dog. And, at the very same moment, a frightful detonation rang out. The engineer staggered as the ground vibrated, as if an earthquake were taking place. A column of water gushed under his feet with such force that the civil servant was thrown more than five yards into the air and then fell back into the midst of an unimaginable chaos of stone, loose soil and water.

At the same time, a large crack, 50 yards long, appeared in the road and the entire sidewalk tumbled into the void, replaced by a lake of black, muddy water.

Human bodies, living beings bobbed to the surface of the water. These people, half drowned, driven by an instinct for survival, struggled to escape the cataclysms and made their way to the edge of this extraordinary lake that had just formed in the middle of the street. People screamed from all directions.

The engineer, however, who had been projected onto a clump of shrubs and lost consciousness for a few moments, recovered. When he opened his eyes, the appearance of the road had changed so much that he thought he had been carried to another place. But his memory returned and, after managing to stand up, he ran off, yelling, “Nihilists! Nihilists!”

A few seconds later, he ran into a flock of police officers running toward the noise, followed by a company of infantrymen, from a nearby barracks. These experienced soldiers, remarkably brave, were rushing to rescue the drowning people. Yet, as a measure of caution, they also grabbed them and put them under guard in an out-of-the-way place at the corner of a deserted street.

The fatal cry had been uttered, the tragic denunciation had been stated: “Nihilists! Nihilists!”

And, after an hour, they came to the realization that they had saved more than sixty people and all of them were taken prisoner. They questioned them, asking them where they came from, who they were and each and every one of them, realizing that lies would serve no purpose, proudly declared, “We are nihilists. Death to the Tsar!”

Juve had just entered the Tsar’s private office.

The policeman was still completely overwhelmed by the frightening events that had occurred. He had managed to change his clothes, thanks to the kindness of some chamberlain and, after quickly cleaning up, he had been taken to the private cabinet of Nicolas II who was supposed to join him there.

Juve had been in the room no more than a few minutes when the Tsar appeared. The ruler was pale and his hands shook. He looked at Juve in fear. Then, collapsing into an armchair, while making sure that two gigantic Cossacks remained at his side to protect him if needed, he interrogated Juve in a feeble voice.

“What happened?”

In a few words, the policeman explained the extraordinary adventure in which he played the role of hero. He told the Tsar how he had entered the nihilists’ cave by chance, then gave the Tsar a detailed account of how he had been required to sentence two honest people, Helene and Fandor, to death.

The Tsar frowned when he heard those names, but Juve noticed nothing.

“What happened then?” the Tsar asked.

“If your Majesty will deign to listen to me for a few more seconds he will know,” Juve replied. “Since I wanted to do everything possible to keep my two friends alive, I decided that I would have to find a way to provoke a cataclysm to prevent the nihilists from carrying out their execution. I had learned by chance from one of the group that, if the valves in the underground walls were opened, the water from the Neva River would flood the cellars.

“I did not hesitate to do, this deciding that even though we might all be drowned there was still a chance that we would be saved. If we had to die then die we would, but we would die together and I would not have to watch the two beings I love most in this world perish before my very eyes.

“I managed to delay the execution until the water, acting like a battering ram destroyed a wall and rushed into the cavern with unexpected violence. At that moment, I believed that we would all drown, but then something strange happened. As it raced into the large quarry, which had no opening at the top, the water compressed the air there and the air pressure prevented the water from rising.

“We did not drown, but we were trapped under a granite vault and destined for a more horrible, slower death. We were surrounded by darkness and, as the water reached shoulder-height, we felt as if our veins were about to burst.

“That’s when I called for Fandor and Helene and was overjoyed when they called back, although the nihilists were screaming all around us. Suddenly, a violent explosion occurred and I lost all my senses. It was only an hour later, when I found myself alive in the police station, that I understood what had happened. Giving way under the pressure of the air that had been compressed by the water, the ceiling of the cavern had exploded, tearing a great rip in the soil overhead and, as the water surged, we were all projected into the road.

“That, your Majesty, is what I can tell you. That is what happened.”

The Tsar remained stunned. Although he realized full well that Juve was not making anything up, he was dumbfounded by the unprecedented events that had taken place.

After a long silence, he said, “The nihilists have all been arrested, according to what the chief of police told me. They will all be tried in 48 hours and their sentence will be merciless. They will all be executed.”

“Juve, I’d like to thank you for telling me this. I appreciate your honesty. Ordinarily, everyone in my entourage hides the truth from me and I am the most ignorant man in my empire. Yet, although I do not doubt what you say, I do, to a certain extent, doubt your perspicacity, Mr. Juve. It’s almost certainly impossible that things occurred exactly as you said. I like to think that under all of these events, there were some horrific machinations on the part of Fantomas.

“I say this without any attempt to reproach you, Mr. Juve. You have handled your own affairs quite admirably, but I don’t think you have concerned yourself with my business. Let us look back over the past few days and you tell me why you had me appoint you to serve as the coachman for the horses I planned to give to the chief of my secret police, to Boris Pokroff. What has happened to him since? And what do you intend to do to protect the Tsarina’s treasures?’’

It was Juve’s turn to be dumbfounded.

The horrific explosion that had occurred, the arrest the nihilists meant nothing at all to the Tsar. What did interest him was knowing what Juve planned to do about the Tsarina’s necklace! What the Tsar wanted to know was why he had joined Boris Pokroff as a coachman! For a moment, Juve was about to confess everything to the Tsar.

He was about to shout, “You wretched emperor! Believing Boris Pokroff is an honest man! Don't you know that Boris Pokroff was assassinated a long time ago and that the most formidable thief in the entire world, Fantomas himself, Fantomas in person, has taken his place, admirably disguised, mimicking his voice.”

Distraught by the Tsar’s blindness, Juve merely said, “Does your Majesty trust the chief of his secret police?”

“Excuse me,” the Tsar interrupted haughtily. “We will not discuss that matter and if your role is to slander the man, we will go our separate ways immediately!”

The Tsar gave his large Cossacks a meaningful glance and Juve realized that if he persisted in saying that Boris Pokroff was none other than Fantomas, he would soon join the nihilists in the depths of the Saint-Jean prison where they had been locked up a few hours earlier along with, and this did concern Juve, Helene and Fandor.

Juve realized that he would have to very cunning with the Tsar and said, “Far be it from me, your Majesty, to suspect Boris Pokroff of any evil intentions. But I must say that I fear for him, living alone as he does in his home in Gatchina. The nihilists have already tried to kill him. Bandits, no doubt led by Fantomas, are certainly planning to steal the necklace, your excellent servant will face certain death and you will lose your priceless treasure if both are allowed to stay at Gatchina. Moreover, I have seen the house and anyone could get into it. It is impossible to protect Boris Pokroff there and watch over the necklace.”

“My God! My God!” said the Tsar. “We will have to seek divine intervention!”

He looked so overwhelmed and so unhappy that Juve decided it would be a good idea to make a suggestion.

“Sire,” he begged. “Please listen to the plans I have just made. I swear that, within 24 hours we will catch Fantomas, while protecting Her Majesty’s necklace.”

“Speak!" replied the Tsar. “What do you want?” Juve said, “Order Boris Pokroff to return here, to Tsarskoye Selo, immediately. Tell him to bring the necklace with him and inform him that, as soon as he enters the palace with the necklace, he will be relieved of all responsibility for watching over it.”

“And if I do that, what will happen?” asked the Tsar.

“I’ve just told your Majesty that, within 48 hours, Fantomas will be unable to do anything.”

The Tsar sighed deeply. He looked at Juve for a long time, doubtful, wondering if he were dealing with a traitor, almost ready to believe it, accustomed as he was to suspecting those who were most dedicated to him. Finally, with a weary air, the Tsar rang a bell and an aide-de-camp appeared.

Nicolas II quickly wrote on a piece of paper.

“Take this order to Gatchina immediately and give it to Boris Pokroff,” he ordered.

The aide-de-camp bowed deeply and disappeared into the countless hallways of the palace. A few minutes later, the Tsar indicated to Juve that the audience was over and the policeman left the room, taken by the two Cossacks to the private apartment reserved for him in Tsarskoye Selo.

Alone in his room, Juve rubbed his hands and said, “I do believe that things are going quite well.

Never before, have we had such as close brush with death! Never before has Fantomas made things so difficult for us! Yet, I do believe that I have handled things quite well. Fantomas, who has no idea I have unmasked him, must be quite bothered about having to watch over the necklace at this moment. He’ll be delighted to bring it back here, to be relieved of that responsibility and he will not hesitate to steal it. And that is exactly what I expect. Once Fantomas had been caught and unmasked, the Tsar will no longer be in any position to refuse me anything. What could I ask him for?”

Juve smiled, burst into laughter and thought, “A dowry for Helene and Fandor maybe... if they are still in Russia when Fantomas is caught. I can’t imagine that they’re still in prison and that selfcentered Tsar hasn’t even told me when he plans to release them!’’

Juve looked at the time.

“Six o’clock in the evening already? I know that at exactly nine o’clock the Tsar will go to the large gallery of busts. I’ll prepare a decree for him. I’ll meet him on his way and give it to him. He can sign it and Helene and Fandor will be released immediately.”

The aide-de-camp, however, had galloped to Gatchina and, without climbing off his horse, knocked at the door to the house which, after some time, opened slowly.

A voice asked, “Who is there?”

“The aide-de-camp, your Majesty!” the officer replied. “I have an order for Boris Pokroff himself.”

The door opened wide. The man showed himself and said, “I’m Boris Pokroff.”

It was, in fact, the so-called chief of the secret police who had come to open the door himself. He read the letter that the officer handed him and a flash of joy lit his face briefly.

Juve had guessed accurately when he decided that Fantomas was finding it difficult to steal the necklace.

When he received the Tsar’s order to take the necklace to Tsarskoye Selo, Fantomas was more than pleased since he realized that, once he was no longer responsible for the jewel, it would be easy for him to steal it right away.

The fake chief of police whistled and two moujiks appeared.

“Keep this officer’s horse,” he declared, as the aide-de-camp dismounted.

Gallantly inviting the man to go before him, he said, “Come into my home, sir. We’ll pick up the necklace together and it will never leave our hands until we are back in Tsarskoye Selo.

The two men walked up to the first floor and Fantomas guided his companion into a large lounge with luxurious furnishings. Then, he pressed on a button hidden behind the wall hangings. A door opened, revealing a small lead-lined cabinet. It contained a large chest.

As Fantomas opened it, he declared, “This is where I placed the necklace.”

But as soon as the chest was opened, both men cried out in surprise. The chest was empty. The necklace was not in it. The aide-de-camp was dumbfounded. Fantomas swore.

The officer, who recovered from his surprise first, said, “By the Holy Images, the necklace has disappeared. What could have happened to it?”

Fantomas who, following his initial explosion of anger, had grown remarkably calm, allowed an ironic smile to flit over his lips, then repeated the officer’s words in an enigmatic tone, “The necklace has, in fact, disappeared. By the Holy Images, what could have happened to it?”

Yet, Fantomas did not look particularly upset. However, he was not the one who had caused the necklace to disappear. What extraordinary thought lay behind his incomprehensible and mysterious smile?



CHAPTER XXIII - Supreme Attempt



“Boris? Boris, my love, are you there?”

The Duchess Ekaterina, quite pale, trembling from head to toe, had just knocked on the door to her lover’s office, which was located on the first floor, not far from the duchess’ room.

The so-called chief of the empire’s secret police was coming up from the ground floor where, he had just noted, in the presence of the emperor’s aide-de-camp, the disappearance of the famous necklace entrusted to his care.

Despite the real or faked emotion he felt, Boris Pokroff, or better yet Fantomas, put on a calm face and smiled as he answered his mistress, saying, “There you are my dear Ekaterina. I’m here. As a faithful, devoted lover, I appear as soon as you start to worry about what has become of me. The faithful little lap dog approaches his...”

When she saw her lover, the duchess started to smile and a blush washed over her cheeks as she threw herself into Fantomas’ arms.

“Ah!” she stammered as her bosom heaved with emotion. “You may tell me that I’m silly, fearful, possibly even mad, but I’m always afraid for you when you go away and just now, as I knew you were meeting with a stranger, the darkest foreboding came over me.”

Fantomas replied gently, “That was no stranger who came to see me. It was Prince Andrieff, his Majesty’s aide-de-camp.”

“Oh,” said the duchess. “And what did he want? As I saw him ride into the courtyard I had the impression that he had pushed his mount hard the entire way. The horse was white with foam when the prince got down from his saddle.”

Evasively, Fantomas replied, “His Majesty had a rather urgent message for me, in fact.”

Affectionate and curious, the duchess asked her lover,” Nothing upsetting, I hope. We’re still going to be able to stay here for a few more days, aren’t we, and enjoy some quiet, peaceful time together?”

The duchess stopped, upset, concerned, when the man in front of her shook his head.

“Unfortunately,” said Fantomas, “We will not be granted that happiness. Contrary to what I had hoped for, I have to return to Tsarskoye Selo as soon as possible.”

“I have to return... don’t you mean we have to return?”

“If that doesn’t frighten you, Duchess,” Fantomas replied.

“Why wouldn’t I return? Are you in some terrible danger?”

“Possibly,” said the bandit.

“Well then!" said the duchess, her face and voice filled with love, “That’s one reason why I won’t hesitate to accompany you.”

Fantomas, too, was overcome with emotion. He pulled his mistress to him and embraced her slowly.

“My poor dear,” he murmured. “It’s so painful that you love a man like me, whose days are always numbered, whose existence is always threatened! I had hoped to have some leisure time, to spend a few happy days with you. To be peaceful for a while... and now I have to return to our emperor.”

The duchess was more and more troubled and said, “Oh, I don’t regret loving you. For me it’s

just another part of my love, knowing that you constantly need to be protected from your many enemies. I would like to be powerful, to be able to protect you myself. I was afraid again just now and I will always be afraid. Everywhere! For you! If you wanted to, we could escape, leave this country and you could once again be just Boris Pokroff. And I would no longer be the duchess and the emperor’s relative, but a simple, unknown middle-class woman, ignored by everyone, your mistress, your wife?”

“That cannot be,” replied Fantomas. “We have our duty to perform, no matter what it costs, and we have to keep on...”

“That’s true!" Ekaterina acknowledged after a moment’s silence. “We do not belong to one another. Everything for the Tsar, everything for Russia!”

Fantomas replied, “Within an hour, Ekaterina, the armored carriage that is to take us back to their majesties will be ready. Go and make your preparations while I do the same. Let us leave this house in Gatchina without regret. We have enjoyed some peace here!”

“Recall the unusual adventures that took place during the night following our arrival. Perhaps, for us, safety lies in returning to Tsarskoye Selo.”

Concern swept over the duchess’ face as she said, “My God! When I hear you say that, Boris

Pokroff... Are you afraid of something?”

And, since Fantomas did not reply, since he continued to look worried, anxious, the duchess pummeled him with more questions.

“Something is threatening you. I’m convinced of it! Some danger that Prince Andrieff came to inform you about, a danger you won’t mention to me so I won’t be frightened. Boris, confide in me. Tell me your concerns so I can share them with you!”

But Fantomas gave her a forced smile, shook his head, and said, “No, I have nothing to fear, nothing in particular, at least. Yet, I cannot hide the fact from you, without being able to tell you any more, that we must both take every precaution.”

Putting the discussion to an end, Fantomas withdrew. The duchess slowly returned to her apartments. Her lover’s mysterious words, filled with innuendo, had upset her.

“Oh,” she said as she placed a trembling hand on the bell to call for her people. “I’m not afraid for myself, but for him. For him. As result of his position he faces so many dangers. He is constantly menaced by the nihilists. As the chief of the secret police he is always in someone’s sights. What can I do? How can I protect the one I love, the one I love more than life?”

And, bit by bit, as she was thinking, an old idea once again took root in her mind and she said, “I absolutely must make sure that Juve provides protection for Boris Pokroff. Was I right to do what I did? Was I right to act as I acted? I can’t believe it, although I want to convince myself, but I must confide in Juve and get his opinion.”

Hearing a knock at the door, the duchess called out, “Enter!”

It was a servant. And just then, setting aside her mysterious problem that so concerned her, Ekaterina prepared to leave.

What had the duchess done? What initiative had she taken? Why did she fear the consequences? What was she hiding from her lover? And why was she hiding something from him?

Fantomas, on the other hand, when he had arrived to talk with Ekaterina, after his chat with the Tsar’s aide-de-camp and their joint discovery that the valuable necklace had disappeared, had taken on a strange attitude, that would not have surprised anyone who really knew what had happened. Fantomas did not believe that he had to inform Ekaterina that the precious necklace for which he was responsible had disappeared from the secret chest in which he had hidden it. Surprisingly, it seemed that Fantomas had been robbed, and that this theft both upset him and amused him.

Once the aide-de-camp, frightened by the answer he had to take to the Tsar, was once again mounted on his horse, Fantomas, very calmly, bid him farewell and instructed him to inform the Tsar about the disappearance of the necklace immediately. He had not seemed terribly emotional about the situation and it was only as he was walking up to his office, when he found Ekaterina there, that he had shown any signs of concern, as if he wanted the duchess to think that, possibly, at that very moment, he was in even greater danger than before.

Why had Fantomas adopted such an attitude and what was he hoping to accomplish?

When the armored carriage had been brought to the front door, Fantomas made sure that it was actually driven by the fat coachman, Nick, and conducted a careful inspection of the vehicle along with the Cossacks who were to accompany him. Only then did he invite the duchess to climb aboard with him.

Yet, before that, the so-called Boris Pokroff gave the village mayor, who had come to see the couple off, a coded message that he was to transmit to the Tsar at Tsarskoye Selo, immediately.

Meanwhile, as the four horses galloped over the deserted, snow-covered road, Juve was sitting in the Tsar’s private office, smoking.

Since the previous evening, the policeman had definitely earned the emperor’s sympathy and favor. In fact, the Tsar was conversing quite familiarly with him, had invited Juve to sit down and had even offered the French man the cigarette he was now smoking.

For the past 20 minutes, he had been chatting with Juve, smiling at the policeman’s words. By times, however, he would look startled, troubled by Juve’s audacious words, but he immediately recovered and encouraged Juve to continue the conversation. And, although Juve was on excellent terms with the Tsar, he was deeply concerned.

The evening before, he had expected them to release Helene and Fandor and, out of a sense of discretion, he had not asked the Tsar directly. But this morning he had learned that all of the nihilists arrested following the explosion on Skobeleff Avenue had been judged by the martial court and were to be executed in eight days. He had learned that Helene and Fandor had been lumped in with the accused and were now sentenced to death!

Overcome with emotion, he had sought out the Tsar and thrown himself at his mercy.

“Majesty! Majesty!” he shouted, “A frightful judicial error has been committed. Two innocent people have been sentenced along with the guilty.

I have come to beg your grace and tell you about them?

Then he explained that he was referring to Helene and Fandor. He was most distressed when Nicholas II replied.

“It is most regrettable, Mr. Juve, that I did not know these things beforehand. But at this late hour, despite my omnipotence, I cannot change the decision made by the martial court. The law allows for no exceptions and I cannot intervene on behalf of your friends.”

“But that’s abominable! That’s frightful!” screamed Juve.

“It is,” replied the Tsar in a tone that brooked no comment. “The only thing I can do is pardon everyone and you know that is impossible.”

These words, however, cast a glimmer of hope into Juve’s mind. Of course, the task he was about to undertake was formidable, but why wouldn’t it succeed? Since the Tsar could pardon everyone then he would insist that the man pardon everyone who had been arrested after the Skobeleff explosion. And Juve, with unparalleled ardor, pled for all the poor wretches. He had been fortunate to find the Tsar in a good mood and, because of that, a strange, extraordinary scene played out between the four walls of the office in which the two men, the Tsar and Juve, chatted.

The emperor of Russia listened kindly to the words of the French policeman and the French policeman, championing the prisoners held in the Saint-Jean prison, attempted to win the Tsar over to the nihilists’ cause. That, in fact, was the formidable task Juve had set for himself. He told himself that, since he had to convince the Tsar to pardon all of the miserable wretches condemned to die along with Helene and Fandor, the only way to do that would be to show the Tsar that those people were right in their thinking and that they had to be released.

Juve argued, “Your Majesty should be the first to preach the holy theories of nihilism! Your Majesty should chase that useless and treacherous horde of lords from another time from his inner circles. Those people have backward ideas and prevent you from being touched by the mysteries of progress, of understanding the benefits of freedom, of seeing the blinding light cast by civilization.”

“But,” said the Tsar, “the nihilists are miserable assassins!”

“They are apostles and martyrs,” retorted Juve. “What is more beautiful than giving up your life for an idea?”

“Nothing, of course,” the Tsar replied in an ironic tone.

And, seeing that the Tsar was in a good mood and was allowing himself to be won over bit by bit, Juve added, “There is something more beautiful than the act of an apostle immolating himself, it is the act of the master, of the god, who prevents that sacrifice! That act, your Majesty, will be yours. I am not pleading for the cause of my friends, Helene and Fandor, here. I’m pleading for the cause of modern humanity in its entirety, for progress, for universal happiness that can only be attained through indulgence and goodwill!”

Juve stopped, atrociously perplexed, wondering how the Tsar would take the audacious words he had just uttered.

“I’ve placed all my cards on the table,” he thought. “And one of two things will happen.

Either I’ll win or the emperor will order me to join my friends in their dungeon.”

Juve waited, panting. The Tsar stood up, paced back and forth in his office, as he did whenever he studied a problem.

He suddenly stopped in front of Juve and said, “You've convinced me. Well almost. The arguments you presented have touched me and it will not be said that the Tsar of Russia will behave like a savage. Juve, I’ll pardon all of the convicts. Every single one of them! Even that abominable pope Alleluia, old Marfa, that sordid old hag, Vassili her son, who is still on the run, and Boleslas, who once held such a large place in my heart. Needless to say, your friends, Helene and Fandor, will also be released, but...”

The Tsar stopped.

“But?” asked Juve, panting, already prepared to agree to all of the emperor’s conditions.

But he received no reply. There was a discrete knock on the door of the private office. The Tsar and Juve looked at one another, stunned, concerned, fearing that it brought bad news, or at least news that was important, since the palace rules prohibited anyone from bothering the Tsar once he had retired into his private office. He was only to be disturbed for a sensational event. What were they about to learn?

The Tsar went to open the door and Prince Andrieff stood before him. The officer was drenched in sweat. His clothing was covered with snow and he had galloped wildly on the road from Gatchina to Tsarskoye Selo, for 20 consecutive verste, without allowing his horse to catch its breath.

When he saw the officer, the Tsar immediately knew that something extraordinary had happened.

“Did you see Boris Pokroff?” the emperor asked.

“Yes,” the officer replied, out of breath.

“Is Boris Pokroff coming back?” asked the Tsar.

“He will be here in two hours at the latest,” came the reply.

“Good,” said the emperor.

And, pausing, after a brief silence, the Tsar added, “And I suppose that, in keeping with my orders, he will be bringing back her Majesty’s necklace?”

Then the aide-de-camp looked at his master in fear. He raised his hand to his helmet and declared in a trembling voice, “No, Majesty, Boris Pokroff will not be bringing the necklace back.”

The Tsar shouted, “He’s not bringing the necklace back? Despite my orders? Why?”

“Because,” said the aide-de-camp bowing his head. “Because, the necklace has disappeared. It has been stolen from Boris Pokroff!”

“From Boris Pokroff!” the Tsar said, staggering.

“From Boris Pokroff himself!" the officer repeated.

Juve listened to this conversation in silence, as it grew more and more serious. The policeman felt overwhelmed and did not understand why the necklace had disappeared. Had Boris Pokroff, namely Fantomas, been unable to resist the temptation to steal the valuable piece of jewelry? That must be what happened, but it was a clumsy move on the part of Fantomas. Yet, Fantomas’ mistake cheered Juve.

“Saying that the necklace was taken from him is like saying that he is unable to serve as the chief of the secret police. Boris Pokroff, or rather Fantomas will be fired, I suppose.”

Juve already started considering the possibility that he would be appointed to replace the sinister bandit. He savored the thought that his first act in his new position would be to arrest Fantomas. But, as Juve was dreaming of these wonderful projects, a red Cossack appeared at the end of the hallway and walked, his back bowed, toward the Tsar. He held a document that he gave to the aide-de-camp who in turn passed it to the Tsar.

Nicholas II read the message, his face growing pal, his eyebrows furrowing and he yelled in anger, “Damnation! Those miserable wretches! It’s always them! When I think that I listened to you, Mr. Juve! Do you want to hear about the latest crime committed by your nihilist friends?”

And as Juve, distraught, remained silent, the Tsar threw the message down at his feet and shouted, “Boris Pokroff has informed me that the necklace was stolen from him by the nihilists and that pack of scoundrels is now in possession of the most beautiful piece of jewelry in the royal treasure chest!”

“Majesty,” Juve started.

But the emperor was beside himself.

He turned to the aide-de-camp and said, “Prince Andrieff, the martial court has condemned about 20 nihilists to death and they are to be executed in eight days. Got and instruct the prison, on my behalf, to execute them tomorrow morning!”

“Majesty, Majesty...” Juve started.

“Back off, get away from me or I’ll hang you along with them,” the emperor raged.

The aide-de-camp had withdrawn and was running to transmit the emperor’s orders.

The Tsar was about to leave his office when Juve intervened, blocked his way, and said, “Pardon me!”

The Tsar grew even paler, believing that Juve would risk death instead of giving way, and said, “You dare...!”

“Yes,” said Juve somberly. “I dare, Majesty, because I have nothing to fear and you have everything to fear.”

“You’re going to assassinate me?” the Tsar asked, growing even paler.

“Possibly,” Juve said abruptly. “If you do not grant me what I ask.”

“This is blackmail” said the Tsar, trying to get closer to the electric bell.

But Juve blocked his way, saying, “Majesty, I’m proposing a gentlemen’s agreement to you. I want you to pardon the nihilists that the court sentenced to death and you want the Tsarina’s necklace...

“It’s possible,” replied the Tsar. “So?”

“Well,” said Juve. “You scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours. I find the necklace and you pardon all those miserable wretches!”

The Tsar thought for a moment and declared, “Fine! But if the necklace is not found by tomorrow morning they will all hang, and you with them!"

“That’s your final word, Majesty?”

“That’s my final word!"

“Fine,” said Juve. “Agreed "

In the park at Tsarskoye Selo, a man walked, bareheaded, impervious to the cold, indifferent to the snow that fell slowly around him.

That man was Juve, appalled, devastated.

He had taken his leave from the Tsar an hour earlier. It was three o’clock in the afternoon and he had until dawn to act, in order to save his friends by finding the necklace.

Although he had won some time, Juve was not certain that he would triumph. Quite the contrary. The Tsar would most certainly not change his mind and Juve had to find the necklace.

How would he do that? Where would he look? If only Juve could get to Fantomas. If only he knew what had happened to the so-called Boris Pokroff. He had heard something to the effect that he was supposed to return to Tsarskoye Selo... But when? Juve had no idea!

The policeman went back into the wing of the palace where the apartment that had been reserved for him was located. His fists clenched with rage, he felt powerless to act, cold drops of sweat pearled on his forehead and he was barely able to refrain from sobbing when he thought that by this time the next day his friends, Helene and Fandor, would be dead, hanged.

As he reached the floor where his apartment was located, a feminine silhouette suddenly appeared before him. A graceful, gentle voice, yet a voice filled with anguish greeted him, “Good day Mr. Juve. I’m so pleased to see you.

Juve stopped and shivered. The Duchess Ekaterina stood before him.

“The duchess is here,” thought Juve. “Let’s hope Fantomas is not far off!”



CHAPTER XXIV - Love Pledges



“They're nihilists!"

Just as the rescuers managed to tear the unfortunate wretches from probable death, as they were buried by the sudden explosion, a great cry rang out.

“Nihilists! They’re nihilists!"

The revolutionaries made no effort to claim otherwise. Realizing, perhaps, that any effort to lie would be in vain and that cowardice would not save them, they took up their courage and proclaimed the truth, shrieking, “Yes, it’s true, we are nihilists!"

Things occurred rapidly after that. The rescuers turned away, as did the troops that had gathered at the site of the catastrophe. A moment earlier, the survivors had been viewed as unfortunate victims and they enjoyed the sympathy of all. But now, everyone considered them assassins, terrible criminals, people who deserved neither pity nor compassion.

An order rang out. A battalion of Cossacks arrived, called by a few passersby who had sounded the alarm.

“Form a square! Surround these people! Take them away!”

Immediately a new horror fell over the poor nihilists. The sky suddenly grew dark and thick snow poured down, as is common in St. Petersburg. The ground was covered in white, traffic slowed, and the poor wretches were hauled off in a gloomy procession to the Saint-Jean ostroghi, followed by the shouts, gunshots, and the cracking of whips, the knouts the Russian army officers carry so often.

Who were these poor people who were being dragged off in this manner? First, there was a large crowd of those who believed in nihilism. And then there were the two people who had been sentenced by the nihilists, two innocent victims, Jerome Fandor and Helene.

To be truthful, when Juve had set off the explosion, he had torn his two friends from certain, immediate death. But had he really saved them?

That, unfortunately, was questionable since fate seemed to be against them.

They had faced the harsh revolutionary tribunal. Now they would no doubt face a regular court. Arrested with the nihilists, considered nihilists, they were going to answer for a crime that all Russia considered the most abominable crime, one for which there was no justice.

No doubt, they would be taken to face some martial court immediately and the sentence was already obvious, without any defense, without any opportunity to explain.

Jerome Fandor, stunned by the misfortune that dogged his heels, asked, “How long before we die? When will they execute us?”

Recalling what he already knew about Russia, he shivered and thought, “Well be precipitated into the void before the week is out no doubt.”

He looked for Helene. The young woman was a few feet away. She was walking bravely, in the middle of a row of prisoners, which protected her from the brutality of the Cossacks.

Once Jerome Fandor saw Helene, he could think of nothing else. With all his might, he would find a way to join her. He wanted to slip over toward her, to make his way to her side. Unfortunately, that was impossible! He had to stay quiet. The slightest movement would be punished by the cruel knout. Fandor shivered as he thought about trying anything at all. He would only draw attention to his beloved and expose her to cruel punishments.

Fandor remained still. He forced himself to a lack of action required under the circumstances. He docilely followed the procession that was heading to the prison, to the slaughterhouse that awaited there. The young man’s sole consolation was that he managed to see Helene’s pretty face from time to time.

Fantomas’ daughter was admirably brave and courageous. Despite the death that lurked around her, despite the certainty of the terrible fate that awaited her, she still managed to smile and that smile was for Fandor!

To the journalist, it felt as if the walk to the ostroghi took an hour. In actual fact, the horrible calvary took just a few minutes. Unfortunately, at the ostroghi, a new pain lay in wait for the young man. He had first supposed that all of the nihilists would be locked up together and he hoped that he would be able to join Helene, that he could talk with her one last time, that he could hold her in his arms.

That was not the case.

No doubt as a security measure, the prisoners were separated. Some were taken down into the lower rooms and others, no doubt considered particularly dangerous, were thrown into cells. Jerome Fandor had no idea why he was one of those thrown into a dungeon. And all too soon he would be more than familiar with the tortures a valiant soul would endure in such a dark place! The night passed. A night of horror and fear, during which Jerome Fandor felt madness brush against his mind. He felt as if he had been crushed under the weight of the colossal, thick-walled prison. He felt as if he were in a tomb. Was he not a living dead man, incapable not only of trying to find deliverance, but also of providing any consolation to the one he loved so tenderly and who was spending a similar night of horror a few steps away.

The morning finally arrived. Jerome Fandor was in a state of exhaustion when he was taken, along with three other condemned men, before the martial court. Everything happened quickly. A harried clerk muttered a few incomprehensible words in Russian. Three judges presided and gave the accused no opportunity to present their defense. Despite his obstinate energy, Jerome Fandor was unable to get a single word in and, less than five minutes later, he was once again taken away.

“That’s fine!” he said to himself. “I didn’t understand the sentence, but I have no illusions. I’m sure I’ve been sentenced to death!”

Fandor was taken back to his cell. He had to spend another entire day in horrible isolation, thinking about death that was so close at hand, with all the suffering of his poor heart that raced in his chest when he thought about Helene.

As night fell, the dungeon grew even darker and the prison seemed to slumber, footsteps rang out in the corridor.

Jerome Fandor stood up quickly and murmured, “Already?”

He thought he knew what was about to happen. His frightened mind dredged up the final horror, the inevitable horror. Assuredly, they were coming for him, they were going to take him to the gallows. Before the door opened, he brushed his hand over his forehead as if to dismiss any problem, as if to chase away all extraneous thoughts.

“So be it,” he said. “If I have to die, then I am ready.”

Then the door opened suddenly. An officer, surrounded by Cossacks, stood there with a lantern in his hand, which he pointed at Fandor, ordering, “Come!”

There was no point in resisting. Jerome Fandor shrugged and went with those who had come for him. Yet, they did not return to the courtroom. Jerome Fandor soon realized that they were not taking him to meet death. Obviously, they were just taking him to a new cell. This transfer was significant, however, since there was no mistake about it, Fandor was being taken to the circular rooms that held all of the convicts who had nothing left to do but wait for death.

Resigned, Jerome Fandor heard the guard play with the locks that opened the way to his last prison. The doors opened and he was shoved into the cell.

But, at that very moment, as the guards were closing the door behind him, a cry of joy rang out, “Fandor!”

And Fandor’s lips trembled as he replied, “Helene!”

Fate had, it seemed, decided to show some favor to the two unfortunate lovers. Sentenced to death, Helene and Fandor were reunited in the round room, the waiting room for the gallows, where all of the nihilists had been placed. The two young people hugged and embraced with all the violent passion of their love.

At that moment, nothing else existed for them. They forgot about the Russian prison, their imminent deaths. They no longer thought about being prisoners, they had no idea they were in the sinister circular room and that other prisoners surrounded them and that they were all pressed up against one another, unfortunate wretches that no one could save.

At that ineffable moment when, after a lengthy separation, after such cruel tortures, they were finally together and Jerome Fandor and

Helene thought of none of all that, no longer understanding anything. They only knew one thing, they only felt one thing, that they loved one another and that they adored one another.

Long hours passed as quickly as a minute. They had so many things to say, to many secrets to confide, so many unfortunate, frightful, horrible misunderstandings to explain!

Helene was the first one to find the courage to bring up confidences. It was the young woman who, with her instinctive uprightness, her natural frankness, wanted to know the truth at any cost. So, Helene questioned Fandor about the sinister adventures she had been part of at the time of her return from Mexico, when she arrived at Montreux, in the neighborhood of the Hotel Croisset, which was apparently nicknamed the Crime Hotel.

“That Natacha,” Helene asked, “Did you love her?”

At that moment Fandor stood up, his voice filled with an expression it was impossible to mistake and said, “Ah! How could you have believed that, Helene? How could you believe that I could love someone other than you? Do you think I’m capable of betrayal? I swear on my honor that there was never any love between me and Natacha. I had barely heard her touching confidences and that was when she was dying in my arms, at the fatal moment when jealousy blinded you, making you believe that I was embracing my mistress...”

And with that Fandor told Helene, with his usual brevity, with great openness, everything about the death of the unfortunate Natacha. He told Helene how the young woman was both pitiful and sinister. He related how the nihilist had been the extraordinary victim of her passion for the infamous and merciless Dr. Loeutch.

Then, suddenly, Fandor stopped talking. He no longer had any need to defend himself. He felt that Helene believed him, that the young woman no longer doubted him. And what good would it do to poison their last few moments with a defense that was unneeded. They embraced again; their lips met once again in a lingering kiss.

And, yet again, Helene was the one to bring up the frightening mystery.

“Fandor,” she asked. “Do you know when we are to die?”

He nodded his head slowly. Unfortunately, at that moment, abruptly roused from his dream, as he returned to reality, Jerome Fandor felt as if he had fallen into an abominable nightmare.

In the prison, around them, the nihilists around them were remarkably calm and resigned. They sang as they waited for death. Some talked. Everyone seemed to accept their destiny calmly, in the absolute certainty that they were irremediably lost and that nothing could be done to save them.

Dawn was coming. Jerome Fandor and Helene, shivering, looked at their cellmates, admiring their fatalistic resignation that is so much part of the nature of the Slavic soul, and that even the most courageous French people could never attain.

At that very moment, footsteps approached the cell. The singing stopped.

One of the nihilists asked “Whose turn is it?”

He asked the very question that had to be asked. The door opened, revealing the guards, the soldiers and a priest. They had come to take the first batch of prisoners to take to the gallows.

Helene, growing pale, moved closer to Fandor. He took her in his arms as his listened to the guards shout the names. He dreamt, at that moment, of impossible things, a sudden rebellion, last-minute protests, a crazy battle. No, if they called Helene he would not allow her to go, he would fight for her. They could not kill her! That was horrible! Mad!

The six nihilists called bid farewell to their comrades and then, with no apparent trouble, accompanied the guards.

The door closed.

The condemned man who had called out earlier, made another sinister comment, saying, “We have five minutes of peace and quiet. I think they’ll take us all this morning!”

Jerome Fandor, eyes hard, repeated, “Five minutes. Five minutes left to live. What miracle could occur in five minutes?”

He thought only of Helene, filled with love and tenderness.



CHAPTER XXV - To Paris!



The day before that terrible morning, as Juve, who had been chased out of the Tsar’s office, fleeing the great leader’s anger, went into the gardens at Tsarskoye Selo to consider the measures he should take, the armored carriage that carried Boris Pokroff and his mistress traveled at full speed along the deserted road that ran from Gatchina to the imperial palace.

Sitting close together, Fantomas and his mistress did not exchange a single word during the first part of the trip. The bandit maintained his sarcastic and mysterious expression and the duchess grew more and more alarmed, fearing that something terrible would happen to her lover, sitting silent as her concerns and fears grew.

She was the one to break the silence.

“Listen to me Boris,” she said in a pleading tone. “The life we’ve been living since we became lovers, since a crazy and sincere passion brought us together, is becoming more and more frightful every day. Just a while ago, in a spurt of enthusiasm, we declared that we do not belong to one another, that our existence, that our fate is linked with those of our sovereigns... Unfortunately, I’m just a poor woman, too loving to be heroic and I want this to change! You have performed your duty, Boris Pokroff, you had dedicated enough of yourself to the cause of the Tsar, and you are entitled to live your life now and to find happiness in a peaceful and quiet retirement. Do you want to prove your love for me?”

Fantomas listened to his mistress, took her hand and clasped it tenderly.

He responded with a question, saying, “How do you want me to prove my love for you Ekaterina?”

The beautiful woman hugged her lover and said, “This life of constant worry is killing me. I want you to resign as the chief of the secret police. Promise me that you will do that. Then, Boris Pokroff, we will go away together, this very evening, tomorrow morning, we will go and live our love in distant sunny countries where people say perfect happiness exists”

Assuredly, Duchess Ekaterina was not counting on a favorable response. She thought that her lover would refuse outright to provide the demonstration of love that she requested. Yet she asked for it anyway, promising to repeat it again at a later time, and convinced that she would eventually get Boris Pokroff to leave the Tsar’s service.

Yet, to her great surprise and amazement, Boris Pokroff, pretending to seem weary, slowly said, “Unfortunately, Ekaterina, what you are advising me to do is not worthy of a man like me, but your proposal comes at a good time for my state of mind. It is germinating there, developing... I admit that I’m tired of these perpetual struggles and the constant anguish that you feel for me. So be it! As soon as we get to Tsarskoye Selo, I’ll tender my resignation to the Tsar. This evening we’ll be free and tomorrow we’ll leave.” 

“My God! Is it possible?” the duchess shouted, unable to believe her ears.

“I swear it is,” Fantomas said.

Then he gently added, “Are you convinced now that I love you more than anything in the world since I’m sacrificing my own self-esteem for love?”

“Tomorrow,” the duchess said, her voice filled with joy. “Tomorrow we’ll leave! But where will we go?”

As if wanting to speed matters up, Fantomas said, “The Northern Express leaves the St. Petersburg station at 11:55 tomorrow morning. We’ll take that train, we’ll go abroad, to France, then we’ll see...”

The two lovers remained thoughtful, embroidering their dreams in the silence with a thousand details that were geminating in their minds.

The duchess was most surprised, not only because she had so successfully obtained what she wanted, but also because Boris Pokroff seemed so eager to organize their departure as quickly as possible.

In this state of mind, they arrived at Tsarskoye Selo. The duchess was entitled to personal apartments in the imperial palace. She set of for them quickly, while Boris Pokroff left her to go and see the Tsar.

She was waiting anxiously in her parlor for the authorization Pokroff had gone off to get from the Tsar when Prince Andrieff was announced.

“What is it?” the duchess asked, alarmed.

The distraught aide-de-camp explained what had occurred between the Tsar and her lover, declaring, “His Majesty was not pleased with Boris Pokroff. The Tsar criticized him for letting the nihilists steal the Tsarina’s necklace. Pokroff was removed from his functions and invited to leave the empire as quickly as possible.

Pokroff chased out of Russia! Pokroff accused of letting the necklace be stolen! What did all this mean? The duchess was dumbfounded. Up to that point she had known nothing about the events that had taken place at Gatchina a few hours earlier. Fantomas had told her nothing, had mentioned nothing about the disappearance of the necklace.

She paced back and forth nervously. Her bosom heaved, her entire body was feverish.

“My God! My God!” she stammered. “What should I do? Which side should I take?”

She collapsed into an armchair and thought.

And then she uttered mysterious words, “What should I do? Should I tell all? Reveal the truth about the necklace. That would be so easy to do? Or hide everything, even from Boris Pokroff?” On the one hand, my lover will be rehabilitated in His Majesty’s mind, but then he will be obliged to remain in the Tsar’s service and he will most certainly die, sooner or later because his enemies will assassinate him. On the other, he will leave, covered in shame and disgrace. But that doesn’t matter at all since I’ll be keeping him alive and we’ll be able to love one another for the rest of lives, without fearing his adversaries and enemies. My God! My God! What should I do?

What will become of me?”

The duchess was still lost in thought when she suddenly got out of the armchair she had collapsed into.

“I cannot keep the secret for myself,” she declared. “I have to share it with someone. I’ll have to confide in Boris Pokroff, unless...”

Just as she was about to leave her apartments, the duchess stopped on the threshold. She had seen a man at the other end of the corridor. Juve. And the sight of the French man stopped her in her tracks. What secret could the beautiful Ekaterina be keeping?

A few moments later, Juve was with the duchess in her parlor.

“You want to talk with me? About what?” Juve asked.

“First,” said the duchess. “Can I trust you absolutely?”

“Yes, madam.”

“Can I trust you to keep the conversation we are about to have absolutely confidential?”

“Yes, madam.”

Can I be certain, Mr. Juve, that if I do a service for you, you will do one for me, without discussion, without bargaining?”

“I’ll see,” Juve said, suspicion suddenly gnawing at his mind.

The duchess knew how to strike the policeman in the heart.

“At present, Mr. Juve,” she said. “I know, since Price Andrieff told me, that you are in a terrible situation, the most terrible situation in which an honest man can find himself.”

“That is true, madam,” Juve acknowledged.

“You must find the missing necklace before tomorrow morning, or you will be hanged...” the duchess continued

“That is true, madam, but death is not important to me! What fills me with despair is that two innocent people, my friends, Helene and Fandor, will be hanged with me...”

“What would you give to find that necklace?”

“Everything in my power, madam!”

“Would you protect the human being I tell you to, no matter what happens?”

Juve grew pale. He looked the duchess straight in the eyes, trying to understand. He suspected what Ekaterina was about to ask him. She was obviously going to ask him to protect her lover which, for Juve, meant sparing Fantomas! The only thing the policeman needed to know was whether or not the Duchess Ekaterina knew that Boris Pokroff was none other than Fantomas. But how could he ask her?

Juve asked, “Are you certain that you can find the Tsarina’s necklace for me?”

“Yes, on my honor,” the duchess replied.

Juve’s mind was made up. As long as the duchess was not lying, and he would have proof of that within a few minutes, he would be able to save Helene and Fandor, as long as he let Fantomas go. Juve hesitated to promise what the duchess asked of him.

She said, “Here is what I want. You will swear on everything that you hold sacred that, until noon tomorrow morning, you will protect Boris Pokroff against everyone that may approach him and wish him ill. Better yet, if you feel the need to raise your hand against him, you will refrain from doing so. That is the price for finding the Tsarina’s necklace!”

This time, Juve could not keep from yelling at the duchess, “Curses, madam! Don’t you know that Boris Pokroff is none other than Fantomas?”

The duchess turned pale. She looked Juve in the eye and said, “I’ve had my suspicions for some time. Now, you’ve just confirmed that Boris Pokroff is Fantomas!”

“He’s a wretched, terrible bandit, the most formidable criminal mastermind,” Juve said.

The duchess interrupted him with a wave of her hand and replied, “He’s my lover, Juve and I... I love him!”

These words were followed by a long silence and then the duchess asked, “Do I have your word, Mr. Juve?”

The policeman bowed his head and as a large tear drop welled up under his eyelid, he said, “You have my word, Madam. I swear that, until noon tomorrow, I will not only protect Fantomas against any and all attacks against him, but I will also keep him from getting arrested. After noon, however..."

The Duchess rushed over to Juve and clasped his hands warmly.

“After noon," she shouted, “You will be as free as we will. Thank, Juve, thank you... I’ll never forget what you have done for us.”

“For you, madam, for you,” Juve corrected.

“Fine, for me,” the duchess said, smiling. “I must admit that one man alone seems capable of protecting my lover, just as one man alone seems capable of defeating him. You!”

Juve frowned and said, “Let’s cut this short, madam. I’ve given you my word. The necklace if you please?’’

The duchess hesitated for a second.

“Please, madam, don’t dither about, don’t waste a minute or I’ll start to regret my promise!”

He stopped and looked at Ekaterina, dumbfounded. With an abrupt gesture, she tore off the light scarf that covered her bosom and shoulders and, uncovering her throat, she revealed, fastened around her delicate neck, the magnificent, sparkling necklace that Juve had promised to get back for the Tsar!

“The Tsarina’s necklace!" the policeman shouted. “You had it!”

“Yes!" replied the duchess. “Allow me to explain...”

Ekaterina then told Juve that, fearing an attack against her lover and concerned that he was solely responsible for the superb necklace, she had taken it, that morning, from the secret chest in which it had been stored for safekeeping. She acted without Boris Pokroff’s knowledge and she had not had an opportunity to tell him that she had the necklace in her possession since Boris Pokroff had neglected to tell her that the Tsar’s aide-de-camp had come for it.

The duchess slowly took the necklace off and handed it to Juve, saying, “You see, sir, I’m keeping my promise. For heaven’s sake, keep yours.”

Juve bowed to her and slowly replied, “I will.”

“Juve!”

“Fandor!”

“Helene!”

The two young people and the policeman hugged passionately.

It was the morning after the tragic evening when Juve, after promising the Duchess Ekaterina that he would spare Fantomas, had received the famous necklace to be returned to the Tsar. The Tsar had lavished Juve with congratulations and thanks. Immediately after that, the Tsar had pardoned all of the nihilists detained in the Saint-Jean prison and the next morning, Juve, Helene and Fandor had been reunited.

They had barely finished congratulating one another when Juve, who had turned somber, declared, “This is no time for us to relate all of the adventures we have had. The Tsar’s pardon comes with a condition. You must leave Russia immediately. The Northern Express leaves St. Petersburg at 11:55 this morning. You have to be on that train!”

“And what about you, Juve?” Helene asked.

“Unfortunately, I can’t come with you,” the policeman replied. “But I’ll follow soon and we’ll meet in Paris.”

“And what about Fantomas?” Fandor asked, timidly.

The policeman’s face grew dark and he said, in a mysterious voice, “Don’t say that name to my face, unless you want to fill my heart with pain.”

Without further explanation, Juve bid the couple farewell and, five minutes later, certain that Helene and Fandor would take the train, he left the hotel where they had spent a few moments and headed back to Tsarskoye Selo.

Juve found the Duchess Ekaterina dressed for travel. She greeted him with a radiant smile.

“Juve!" she said, “You have fulfilled your mission admirably. I know that you spent the night outside the door to Boris Pokroff’s room and protected him...”

“I committed that crime, madam,” Juve replied. “And I swear that, many times, I had to clasp my hands to keep from strangling that bandit!”

“Juve,” continued the duchess. “In just two hours you will be free to continue hunting Fantomas, but you must keep your promise until then. Will you?”

“I will, madam.”

The duchess took a step closer and said, “I’m leaving Russia, Juve. A train, the Northern

Express, will be taking me to Paris in a few minutes. My carriage will come to take me to the train station. I’m counting on you to accompany our vehicle.”

“Our vehicle?” replied Juve. “You’re not leaving alone?”

“No,” said the duchess.

A few minutes later, his heart filled with rage, Juve had to climb into the duchess’ sumptuous limousine. She was accompanied by Boris Pokroff, who glanced at the policeman, eyes filled with scorn.

Juve needed exceptional strength to keep his oath! But he had given his word of honor and he would keep it until the very end! It was 11:40 in the morning. The travelers in the Northern Express were settling into the compartments. Furious, Juve paced back and forth on the platform.

“I can do nothing!” he screamed. “I promised to stay in St. Petersburg until precisely noon! I didn’t see the trap! The duchess connived to help her lover escape. And I can’t even warn Helene and Fandor that Fantomas is nearby on their train!”

Juve had seen his friends settle in the compartment. He did not reveal himself to them, fearing that he would not be able to keep his secret. Then he had watched as the duchess settled in a reserved car, along with the fake Boris

Pokroff, Fantomas, the man who had assassinated the real chief of the secret police.

Juve will overwhelmed by anguish and rage! He must not lose track of the bandit.

Suddenly an idea came to him and he raced to the stationmaster’s office.

“Sir,” he declared, in a voice that was both beseeching and authoritarian. “I find myself in a most extraordinary situation. I absolutely must take the Northern Express. But the train cannot leave the station until precisely noon. Can you arrange to have the train leave eight minutes late? I’ll be responsible for any costs this might entail.”

The stationmaster looked at Juve, dumbfounded. Then after a moment of silence, he replied, “Sir, I understand full well what you expect of me and there will be no cost. I’ll delay the departure of the train for a few minutes.”

Juve stopped, surprised that his request had been granted so easily.

“Are you certain, sir?” I can count on you?”

“But, of course,” the employee replied, coldly.

Juve returned to the platform, heart pounding, as he watched the time pass. It was 11:55 and the minutes felt like centuries to the policeman. Suddenly a violent emotion washed over him. Usually, the train would leave in two minutes and all of the preparations seemed to indicate that the departure would take place as scheduled.

“Yet, the stationmaster promised me...” said Juve.

Then, he suddenly winced as he heard two employees whispering.

“You see,” one said, pointing at Juve. “That man is crazy and the stationmaster reported him to us. He wanted to delay the train, no doubt for some extravagant reason! The stationmaster promised, because he didn’t want to upset him, but he’s scheduled the train to leave a minute early, just as a precaution!”

The train whistle blew. That was the signal.

“Curses!” Juve exclaimed, his face twisted in anguish.

What could he do? How could he keep the train from leaving? The policeman raced over to the locomotive, jumped onto the platform, landing next to the engineer.

“One hundred rubles! One thousand rubles to delay the train until noon!” he shouted as he held a wad of bank notes out to the man.

The locomotive engineer, initially surprised by the policeman’s unexpected appearance, waved to his fireman, a giant covered with black coal dust, who threw Juve to the sidewalk.

The policeman landed so hard that he felt dizzy for a moment. Yet, two seconds later Juve was back on his feet. Before his eyes, the train shuddered slowly, silently sliding along the rails.

It was exactly 11:51. Juve stayed there a moment, appalled, as he watched the heavy train move along the platform. Through one of the windows, he saw Fantomas, smiling at him ironically.

Dismayed, exasperated, Juve screamed, “A locomotive. Prepare a locomotive for me!”

And unable to resist the fear that had been torturing him, the fear of losing Fantomas, he was racing for the running step on the last car, as it passed by him, when hands grabbed his shoulders.

“Let me go!” shouted the policeman.

But the hands held firm.

“Are you Juve?” someone asked.

“Yes, I’m Juve,” the policeman shouted. “Let me go! You can see that I have to catch this train, the train carrying Fantomas!”

Two voices laughed stridently. Juve looked at the people laughed. Guards.

“That’s all fine and dandy,” one of them said. “But you’re not about to take the Northern Express for the border just now!”

“Why?” Juve asked, furious.

“Because,” said the other guard, “We have orders from the Tsar to arrest you.”

Distraught, Juve grew pale.

“Orders from the Tsar to arrest me! But why?”

“Come on,” said the first guard, shrugging.

“Don’t try to make us believe that you know nothing about this! You know full well that the necklace you returned...”

“Yes!” said Juve, impatiently.

“Well,” the man continued. “The necklace you returned is a fake. What did you do with the real one?”

“My God! My God!” Juve stammered

Distraught, overwhelmed, the French policeman collapsed, half conscious, as the two guards dragged him off.

TO BE CONTINUED IN VOLUME 2: THE END OF FANTOMAS

