BOOK TWO: THE END OF FANTOMAS

CHAPTER I - The Trap



“In the name of the law, we arrest you!”

The Cossacks surrounded Juve suddenly and the policeman who, obviously, did not expect such an end to his adventures in Russia, could not keep from shuddering as he heard the words that indisputably announced new problems and difficulties. Yet, Juve recovered his composure.

In a calm voice, he asked, “You’re arresting me. Fine. But that doesn’t tell me anything at all.

What are you arresting me for?”

The commanding officer replied, “You’re accused of giving His Majesty the Tsar a fake necklace instead of the real necklace.”

“Ah!” said Juve, and refrained from adding anything else.

Although, at the time of his arrest, he understood little about the reasons for it, he realized full well that there was no point in protesting to the Cossacks and that it was highly likely that, speaking at random, answering without knowing, could eventually expose him to more serious proceedings and greater problems.

Despite his composure, however, Juve grimaced. His arrest was so sudden, so unexpected that he initially wanted to consider it a mere formality. Yet, he quickly concluded that was not the case. They were not arresting him on a whim. They were completely serious, which became even clearer when they placed handcuffs on his wrists as four soldiers, four giants, kept a close eye on him.

“Well,” sighed Juve, phlegmatically. “This trip to Russia is coming to a very bad end. What will happen to me now?”

At that moment, despite himself, Juve could not keep from glancing, with regret, at the Northern Express which, in a few minutes, would leave St. Petersburg, in a cloud of steam, heading for Belgium and France.

Assuredly, Fandor and Helene had to be on the train, waiting for him. They would have no idea that he had been arrested, they would leave and Juve would be all alone in Russian, a large country with strange traditions and extraordinary customs where he felt so terribly foreign, misunderstood, alone in the middle of the crowd, abandoned by all.

A moment later, Juve recovered, saying to himself, “Well, we’ll see which of us, Fantomas or me, has the last word. What is happening to me is obviously the consequence of one of that wretch’s many tricks. He may have won this match, but I will have my revenge.”

Juve docilely followed the soldiers as they escorted him out of the station and pushed him toward a sleigh. He was perfectly aware that protesting would serve no purpose. The soldiers who had arrested him were merely following orders, ignorant of the grounds. What did they care about Juve’s recriminations, his complaints?

“All right,” thought Juve. “He who laughs last, laughs best!”

The sleigh, surrounded by Cossacks on horseback, raced through the streets of St. Petersburg.

Juve, just a while earlier, as he headed for the station, had hoped, to tell the truth, that he would be leaving Russia for once and for all. Despite himself, he was unable to hold back a strong sense of disappointment as they took him back, a prisoner. Yet, thanks to the deep philosophical beliefs he always adhered to, he made the most of this unpleasant adventure to note, yet again, the picturesque nature of Russian customs. In France, the passage of a prisoner, in a vehicle surrounded by guards would obviously have aroused public emotions, a lively curiosity. But nothing at all like that happened in Russia. No one turned to look at the Cossacks, no one glanced at the prisoner. One more, one less, who was keeping count? There were so many arrests each day that onlookers had grown blase.

“There’s no reaction!" Juve said to himself. “I can’t even enjoy the satisfaction of hearing brave people call out, as they would in France, ‘He looks like a bandit!”’

Juve, already reassured, started to joke. His gaiety, however, did not last long. The direction in which his escort was headed was filled with meaning.

“Good grief!” said the prisoner. “Are they taking me to Tsarskoye Selo?”

The sleigh did, in fact, sop at the Tsar’s palace a short while later. At that moment, the officers of the escort that were accompanying the sleigh invited him to get down. Juve set foot on the ground.

“Will I be thrown into some dungeon?” he wondered. “Stood against some wall and shot? Or will I be lucky enough to be interrogated?”

A very brightly dressed officer, obviously some important dignitary, stepped out from the palace. He murmured a few words in the ear of the commanding officer of the escort that had just arrested Juve. The officer nodded and walked over to the policeman.

“What does he want?” Fandor’s friend wondered.

At that very moment, the Russian stopped, bowed deeply to Juve, and introduced himself, saying, “His Excellency Gourochtsky, His Majesty’s aide-de-camp.”

The policeman was most surprised. People didn’t usually introduce themselves to prisoners. What did this mean?

Not wanting to be impolite, Juve in turn bowed, bending double, then declared, “Juve, French police officer, from the Surete de Paris!”

He had barely finished speaking when the other man held out his hand. Juve, naturally, clasped it and shook it. At that moment, however, the excellent Juve’s surprise reached extraordinary proportions.

“They’re shaking my hand!” he said to himself. “First they arrest me and then they give me an almost official reception. These Russians are crazy!”

But he barely had time to think about the sudden madness that taken over the inhabitants of the imperial palace.

With exquisite manners, the Russian added, “Please follow me sir. I have rigorous orders in your respect.”

“How could I not follow him,” Juve grumbled to himself, adding out loud, “Your wish is my command, Your Excellency.”

A moment later, Juve found himself alone in one of the large parlors at Tsarskoye Selo. It was a vast room, with truly remarkable architecture. It was, in fact, a rotunda. It was completely circular and there were no windows. Daylight flowed in through the ceiling, a ceiling of frosted glass on which human shadows appeared to be strolling back and forth. Juve noted all this with a glance.

He thought, “My word, this might just be the Tsar’s personal parlor. No windows... because he’s always afraid of being assassinated and thinks people will shoot at him through the glass... a glass ceiling with armed guards... that would be it!”

But, at the same time, Juve could not keep from smiling at that presumption.

“Damn, I’m a prisoner!” he grumbled. “And a prisoner suspected of robbing the Tsar of all the Russias... I suppose that, after all that, the Tsar won’t be giving me an audience! The excellent Nicholas II must be convinced that I’m an abominable criminal and must be scared stiff of me!”

This thought had just passed through Juve’s mind when his presumptions were proven wrong. The door to the parlor, the only door in the round room, opened wide.

An usher called out, “His Majesty, the Tsar!”

And the Tsar did, in fact enter. Nicholas II, blond, puny, looking like a young man, despite the fact that he was in his forties, appeared. He was wearing a military uniform and carried an enormous saber in his hand, which he used much like a cane. The Tsar was smiling.

He walked over to Juve, held out his hand, and said, “Good day Mr. Policeman.”

And, for possibly the first time in his life, Juve was so dumbfounded that he was unable to answer. In fact, after he had been arrested in the manner in which he had been arrested, and now finding himself suddenly in the presence of the Tsar, who was holding out his hand, Juve found the situation so unlikely, so startling, that he remained silent.

The Tsar said, “Mr. Juve, are you cross with me? Are you furious with me?”

“But Majesty...” Juve said, then stopped and crossed his arms.

“Good grief, Majesty, if your Majesty would authorize me to speak openly, I would admit that I wonder if I’m dreaming.”

“And what makes you think that?”

“Damn,” replied Juve, who was starting to neglect the rules of protocol, something which had never really been his strong point.

“Damn, Majesty, because I’m surprised and astonished... and overwhelmed by everything that is happening...”

At that moment, the Tsar collapsed onto a low chair, overturning it.

“Really, Juve,” he murmured. “You’re astonished? Please tell me why.”

“Willingly, sire.”

And Juve, who was starting to feel his normal good mood returning, quickly and clearly explained why he was so astonished.

“I was about to leave!" he said. “I was about to return to France... I was quite certain that I had given you the real necklace and then, all of a sudden, they tell me that it was a fake necklace and then they arrested me... Naturally, I was upset by the situation. I was expecting, Sire, to be punished for a crime I had not committed. I was afraid your Majesty was angry with me. Yet, now, it does not seem as if your Majesty is all that irritated with me, since your Majesty honored me with a handshake!”

The Tsar had watched Juve closely as he spoke. When the policeman stopped talking, however, the other man burst into cheerful laughter.

“My dear Juve,” he murmured. “This simply proves that you don’t really know me yet. I’m a man of the moment.”

“Which means?” asked Juve.

“Which means,” confirmed the Tsar, “that when I discovered that the necklace you had returned was a fake one, I ordered my men to arrest you.”

Juve lowered his head and, without wondering if he were being too bold, asked, “And now, Sire?”

“Now?” said the Tsar. “Well, now I’ve considered the matter. You certainly can’t be the thief so I’m not arresting you any longer!”

Juve did not move a muscle when he learned that he was free. He was always calm, extraordinarily calm, in good times and in bad. However, he did not feel particularly satisfied.

“I’m free,” he replied. “So much the better. I don’t really have a taste for prison! Plus, it’s annoying to be considered a thief. But can your Majesty tell me what is really going on? The necklace I returned to you is not the real diamond necklace that was stolen?”

When he heard these words, the Tsar shook his head and said, “Unfortunately not. Just a bad copy with no value at all.”

Then the Tsar told Juve what had happened following his departure.

He informed the policeman that a chance incident had revealed the error, Fantomas’ swindle. He told Juve how, in a moment of fury, he had ordered his men to race to the station and arrest Juve.

The policeman, for his part, did not take long to realize what had really happened. He uncovered Fantomas’ trickery, figured out how the bandit had been able to deceive him. It took him no more than a second. Unfortunately, it did not seem as if it would be easy to remedy the situation.

“I’ve been conned!" Juve concluded, who never minced his words when talking about unpleasant matters. “Fve been conned by Fantomas like a fool. It’s time to take up the fight!"

Juve stretched his arm out, as if to make a solemn oath, and said, “I had hoped that your Majesty had the authentic necklace in his possession. Since that is not the case, I will have to set out immediately to find it.”

Juve was about to say more, possible to ask permission to leave immediately and set off on his new investigation, when the Tsar stopped him with a wave of his hand.

“Juve,” murmured the imperial sovereign, in a tone that had suddenly grown serious. “I have to find that necklace. I absolutely have to!”

As Juve looked the other man straight in the eyes, the Tsar insisted, speaking each word distinctly, as if to highlight their importance,

“I have to Juve, because I’m going to need it... because, in a short while, in less than a week perhaps, the empress and I will be going to France and, in keeping with protocol, it will be necessary for her Majesty to wear the necklace during the festivities organized in our honor... And you, Juve, have to find it since I must admit, despite myself, that if the necklace is not found, I would continue to have some suspicions in your respect...”

The Tsar’s voice was filled with emotion as he spoke.

Juve, despite himself, was touched, and replied, “Your Majesty can rest assured that I will do everything in my power to satisfy his wishes.

But I will need my freedom if I am to act. Am I free, Sire?”

The Tsar hesitated. Nicholas II was assuredly, as he had just told Juve, torn between two emotions. When he took the time to think about it, he realized full well that it was completely ridiculous to suspect Juve of theft. Yet, just as the Tsar decided that Juve was innocent, he realized, despite himself, that everything pointed at the policeman and that it looked almost certain that he had been Fantomas’ accomplice.

Yet, Nicolas II could not have any illusions about Juve’s request, Juve had to conduct an investigation to find the necklace and, to do that, the Tsar would have to free him. Juve could hardly investigate while languishing in prison or being required to remain in Russia, or even by being kept under police surveillance.

Abruptly, the Tsar made up his mind and said, “You will be free, Juve.”

Then he corrected himself, saying, “You’re free immediately!”

Juve had watched the hesitations and uncertainties flit over the Tsar’s face. And Juve was far too good a psychologist to be mistaken when it came to the Tsar’s reasoning.

He replied, “I thank your Majesty for not letting himself get carried away by such unworthy emotions. And I fully intend to provide evidence of my good faith. I would appreciate it if your

Majesty would accept the oath I am about to make. Sire, I give you my word of honor that I will do everything possible to find your necklace. If I find it, we will be quits. If I don’t find it, I will turn myself over to your police lieutenant. I imagine that this will mean that your Majesty will no longer have any doubts about me!”

Juve’s words were clear and definitive. The Tsar saw this. He lowered his head and asked, “Juve, do you have any orders to give? Do you want to take the measures you consider necessary right away? I, of course, will make sure that everyone here is at your disposal.”

“Your Majesty is too generous,” replied Juve.

The policeman thought for a minute, then

lifted his head, and said, “I do have orders to give, in fact, sire. But first I’ll need some information.

“What information? Can I provide it?”

“Without a doubt, if your Majesty allows me to question him.”

“Go ahead, Juve. Ask away! What do you want to know?”

“What is the name,” Juve asked, “Of that border town where the Northern Express leaves Russia and heads into Germany?”

The Tsar replied, “That’s the little station at Eydtkuhnen.”

“Are there any policemen stationed there?”

“Of course.”

“And how do the travelers disembark?”

“As they do in any other border station, Juve. They get off the train. Russian trains are not allowed to enter Germany because of the difference in track gauge. Then they go through Customs, they greet the Holy Images, and they get back on the train. That’s all.”

“Fine,” said Juve.

The policeman looked lost in thought for a moment, then asked, “Where is the one place where it is certain that all of the travelers, without exception, will pass by?”

“The Holy Images sidewalk,” replied the Tsar. “No one can enter Russia, no one can leave Russia, without greeting the icons located at the border station. The passports, moreover, are checked right next to that icon.”

“Fine,” Juve said again.

And, since the Tsar was looking at him, no doubt expecting some sort of indication as to what he was about to do, Juve stood up coldly, without a word.

‘Til go and issue orders, Sire. Do I have your permission to leave?”

“Go!” said the Tsar.

The train from St. Petersburg arrived in a cloud of steam at the small border station at Eydtkuhnen. Russian trains are usually deplorably slow, but the Northern Express, exceptionally, had pushed its pace as it approached the German border. Employees were already busy at the station.

Dressed in picturesque outfits that made them look like butchers, the station employees, with their large aprons flapping in the wind, stood in a line along the platform. It was obvious that, as the train was about to stop, they would race off to attack the compartments and convince the travelers to confide their small hand luggage to them. They would then carry it off to the Customs, hoping for tips.

A few minutes later, in fact, the entire station was filled with the noisy hustle and bustle of the crowd as everyone strove to complete the various formalities involved in crossing a border, formalities which are all the more complicated in Russia since passports are still required.

The travelers, naturally, all raced in a disorderly manner along the platforms. Each individual wanted to be the first to go through Customs and they fought hard to make their way into a narrow corridor that connected the Russian border station to the German border station, a narrow corridor where the Holy Images that all travelers had to greet when entering or leaving Russia were located.

Yet, while the hustle and bustle was at its peak, while everyone rushed this way and that, a man deliberately, slowly climbed down from the train that was parked along the platform, the

Russian train that was about to head back to St. Petersburg.

Who was that man?

If Juve had seen him, if Fandor or Helene had merely glimpsed him, they would have most certainly shuddered. Unfortunately, Juve was in St. Petersburg and both Fandor and Helene had rushed to disembark. The young people, concerned because Juve had not joined them, had been eager to get to the German station where they hoped to find a telegram waiting for them.

Did the man know any of this? Was he aware that Juve was not on hand, that Fandor and Helene were concerned? That was possible, considering the ironic smile on his lips.

“No one!” he said. “No one bothersome! All the better! I’ll leave Russia as easily as I got in. Obviously, the police are quite stupid! They can’t even guard a border station properly!”

He carried no baggage. Yet, from time to time, almost automatically, the man would reach his hand into the fob of his waistcoat, seeming to make sure that an object he prized was still there. The man walked a few steps on the platform. In the distance, he watched the crowd attacking the Customs employees.

“Imbeciles!” he murmured. “Imagine the panic I could cause if I were to shout, “Hey. Take notice! I’m here! Fantomas is here!”’

And he burst out laughing.

“Fantomas!”

Was the man getting off the Northern Express at Eydtkuhnen really Fantomas? Was it really the terrible bandit who was walking slowly along the platform, glancing cautiously, carefully, left and right, clearly aware of the formidable gamble he was taking by trying to cross the border unnoticed?

It was, in fact, Fantomas.

Once again, Fantomas had been the supreme victor. Once again Fantomas had trumped Juve. Fantomas had managed to steal the real necklace. It was the precious diamonds that he had automatically sought in his pocket a few moments earlier. And if Fantomas, despite everything, was worried, after such a major victory, it was because he was thinking, “This victory is too wonderful to be final. Juve will never accept his defeat and, out of a desire for vengeance, that damned policeman will try to find me!”

Yet, he had to act. At that moment, Fantomas was fully aware of what he needed to do. If he could get into Germany, if he could get out of Russia, he would be safe. If, on the other hand, he was unable to cross the border, he would fear the worst since Fantomas had no illusions about the matter. Juve had probably set all of the Russian police on his heels.

Yet, despite his concerns, Fantomas remained calm.

While Juve was, at times, capable of retaining a surprising presence of mind, Fantomas mastered his nerves marvelously. Anyone who crossed his path, as he walked calmly along the station platform, would never have suspected the emotion that tormented him.

The master criminal looked left and right. At first, he noticed nothing suspicious. But all too soon he shuddered. On the other side of the train, he saw Cossacks cordoning off the entire train. What did this deployment of troupes mean?

Fantomas frowned and said to himself, “My word, the station is under guard. Could Juve have sent a telegram notifying them of my possible arrival? Have they set a trap?”

He took a few more steps and muttered, “This is abominable! Soldiers on all sides. The station is completely surrounded. Obviously, I won’t be able to get out. I’ll either have to stay in the train and head back to St. Petersburg or risk everything, face Customs, head down the corridor filled with policemen, make my way to the German station!”

He stopped for a moment, pretending to read a poster, and asked, “What am I to do?”

Obviously, Fantomas had to think for a moment. Going through Customs, exposing himself to a painstaking search, letting the authorities see him up close, it all involved a terrible risk. Should he retreat from this danger? Remain in Russia? That might involve even greater danger.

“Well, let’s try this!” Fantomas murmured.

Then bandit walked straight over to one of the station employees and asked, “Customs, good man?”

The man stared at him and replied, “Straight ahead, to your right, sir. But first you have to have your passport stamped."

“Is that obligatory?”

“Yes sir.”

After a moment of silence, possibly without realizing the whirlwind of emotions he had set off in the other man, the station employee added,

“And today, sir, there’s more. We’ve received telegrams, and you don’t just have to go through German Customs. A special service has been arranged. All travelers have to be searched.”

“Searched?” Fantomas said, startled. “What do you mean?”

“It’s simple,” explained the man. “You have to get undressed. Special employees, policemen I believe, will examine your clothes before you put them back on.”

“Thank you,” replied Fantomas.

He took a few steps in the direction indicated by the man, then as the other man turned his head, Fantomas turned right, and walked into a large hangar.

“Good grief!” thought Fantomas. “What the devil will I do?”

Then he thought out loud, “Curse Juve! Sooner or later, that infernal policeman will have to pay for the anguish he’s causing me just now!”

Overwrought, Fantomas collapsed onto a bundle, a large crate that stood nearby. He had no illusions about what he had just learned. Troupes surrounded the station, the close scrutiny of passports, the search, the painstaking search, all proved that Juve had already given orders to mobilize the police and that all the travelers crossing the border at Eydtkuhnen were under surveillance.

Despite himself, Fantomas shuddered, muttering, “If they search me, if they search my clothing, they’ll certainly find the necklace...On top of that I don’t have a passport... Will my adventures come to an end here? Will I stupidly allow myself to be caught by the idiotic Russian police?”

He ground his teeth.

Fantomas was still thinking when, suddenly, he leapt to his feet, instinctively taking a dagger from his pocket. He had heard a noise. Close by.

“Is someone following me?” he murmured.

But, at that very moment he smiled. Obviously, fear was driving him mad! What had startled him was the commotion, coming from a large crate, the very one he had been sitting on, caused by a dozen black hens.

Fantomas shrugged and stared fixedly at the poor creatures, lost in thought.



CHAPTER II - A Mysterious Threat



“So, Mr. Havard., what's new?”

My goodness, not much dear friend!" “Everything quiet in your department?" “Good grief, everything is quiet." “No upsetting matters?"

“No, none."

“No political surveillance?”

“Not for the time being."

“How happy you must be, Mr. Havard!" “You’ve got that right, dear friend."

The two civil servants burst out laughing.

Mr. Havard had responded in a rather ironic tone and the man speaking with him, the man he called ‘dear friend’ did not seem particularly upset about that, fully cognizant of the advantages of his position and prepared to concede that, in fact, chance had given him a most enviable life.

His name was Mr. Peyroussin. He could not claim to have done anything remarkable. He had never done anything in his life and, yet, he was on his way to becoming an interesting personality and, what was even better, one of those handsomely paid bureaucrats found in such abundance in the Third Republic.

Mr. Peyroussin, a minor lawyer had not yet considered the possibility of either making a fortune or even adding a bit to the heritage that his worthy father had left him when he had learned, unexpectedly, while reading a newspaper in the Cafe du Commerce, in Bayonne, that one of his cousins, who had left for Paris a long while ago, had just wrangled the portfolio of Public Education, through political maneuvering.

When he had first learned the news, Mr. Peyroussin had felt profoundly jealous of his relative. He had, in fact, experienced the same feelings as all those who have failed when faced with the good fortune of another and asked himself, without understanding, “Why him? Why not me?”

Yet, this feeling was quickly replaced by another. His bile exhausted, his jealousy given free rein, he had immediately thought that, although it was undeniable that his relative had become a minister by luck, it was also just as undeniable that, unless he, Mr. Peyroussin that is, was a complete idiot, he should make the most of the good fortune enjoyed by a family member.

People from Midi, in general, have no doubts and have a serious advantage over other provincials, because they seriously believe in blood ties.

When he learned that one of his cousins had been appointed Minister of Public Education, Mr. Peyroussin quickly told himself, “A minister is a powerful man... a powerful man is someone who grants favors... Good grief! If I feel like it, I can be a sub-prefect!”

And, with that, without a moment’s hesitation, he went home, packed his suitcase and took the first train to the capital.

When he arrived in Paris, Mr. Peyroussin did not even take the time to find a hotel. He simply called for a coach and shouted out, “To the Ministry!”

And, with that boastfulness that is typical of people from Gascony, he decided, in order to attract the coachman’s admiration, to add, “The minister is my cousin!”

If Mr. Peyroussin had not been from Midi and, above all, if his cousin had not been born in the sunniest region of France, matters would have most certainty taken a turn for the worse. Ministers in general like to grant their favors to those who can be of service to them, not their provincial cousins. They are even less inclined to grant favors to relatives who turn up in the evening, suitcase in one hand and hat in the other, and who hand over their calling card to the clerk, saying “Tell you master not to keep me waiting. I’m famished”

But, fortunately, Mr. Peyroussin was from Midi and so was his cousin. And, although he might have felt a little embarrassed, the Minister was not the least surprised. Five minutes after reading his cousin’s card, he opened the door to his office and discovered Mr. Peyroussin in a friendly discussion with the clerk, smoking a cigarette in the waiting room. Grounds for firing the clerk! But the minister didn’t even blink. However, he just might have thought, “Obviously, my relative is straight out of the country. He’s still unabashedly shameless!”

Yet, hand out, he walked over to his cousin, saying, “Well, well. Here you are! In Paris! What’s brought you here?”

Mr. Peyroussin did not even wait until the door to the office closed, before saying, “Good grief! I’ve come to see what you can do for me... I need to be decorated first, then I’ll want a sub-prefecture...”

In all truth, though, Mr. Peyroussin did not obtain everything he asked for. He was not decorated, although he was given an agricultural honor. They did not give him a sub-prefecture, but they did find an extraordinary position for him in the department, without giving him a precise title, which involved bothering everyone, under the pretext of providing supervision, for which the public purse paid him 15,000 francs per year.

And, since that time, just by chance, Mr. Peyroussin had not said a bad word about his cousin. He experienced not the slightest bit of hatred for his relative. He was not angry with him for finding him paid work. Mr. Peyroussin had not received any increase, but he was considered one of those immovable, hopelessly incompetent individuals, that swarm throughout the various ministries.

His cousin had, naturally, been defeated and numerous ministers had replaced him in power, but Mr. Peyroussin was still in his position, forgotten by all, unknown to the cabinet bosses, taking up as little space as possible, failing to go to his office, giving no sign of life, to be perfectly honest, except at the end of the month when it was time to go to the treasury to draw his wages.

Naturally, this type of life gave Mr. Peyroussin time for his leisure activities. He spent his days, as pleasantly as possible, visiting friends, for the most part other civil servants, taking part in lengthy discussions intended solely to kill time.

At this time, Mr. Havard was one of Mr. Peyroussin’s closest friends. In fact, as a result of his duties, the head of the Surete most often had the most fascinating anecdotes to relate. He knew all about the most recent scandals, the latest gossip, the most malicious scandal-mongering that would scandalize all of Paris.

Mr. Peyroussin would chat with him and then, once informed, he would quickly don his hat, hastily take his leave and run to take care of his business, as he liked to put it. Generally, he would go to see another friend and pass on all the juicy news, playing the role of a well-informed man.

Now this day, in fact, Mr. Peyroussin had not been lucky. He had pushed Mr. Havard, interrogated him with the skill of a court judge, but he had obtained no information, nothing.

There was nothing to be learned from the Surete. Everything was calm.

No sensational crime, no half-smothered scandal, no politician found in a compromising situation, not even an elegant woman arrested in a large store for stealing!

“Well,” sighed Mr. Peyroussin, stretching his arms. “Life is quite boring...”

Then, suddenly he had an idea.

“What about Juve?” he asked “Do you have any news about Juve?”

Mr. Havard roused himself from his torpor, shook his head furiously, shrugged, and said, “Juve is still in Russia. The last I heard he was on close terms with the Tsar. Juve will come back to us a decorated man!”

Mr. Peyroussin smiled ironically, as if to protect such as supposition and replied, “Now that’s a good one! Juve decorated? Come now! He’d do better to arrest Fantomas!”

“Obviously,” conceded Mr. Havard in a tone that was somewhat venomous, “But that’s more difficult.”

“No news of the thief?” Mr. Peyroussin asked.

“No... well...”

“Meaning?”

“Meaning that we know nothing for sure and people always talk about the Master of Fear in vague terms.”

Although Mr. Havard continued to talk in pleasant tones, he provided no suggestive details. Perhaps the head of the Surete did not particularly want to discuss Fantomas.

Fantomas was, in fact, not only the King of Frightful, the Master of Fear, the Criminal Mastermind, the Unparalleled Torturer, he was also the Uncatchable. Fantomas was the legendary thief that all of the departments within the Surete had been trying to catch for years, without ever succeeding.

Fantomas was Mr. Havard’s remorse, his shame. The newspapers joked about the head of the Surete; the magazines satirized him for his failure to stop the sinister criminal.

Unfortunately for Mr. Havard, Mr. Peyroussin, who had nothing to do, was far too curious to settle for a flat refusal. Of course, although he had not learned anything, he still suspected nothing and he had the feeling that Mr. Havard was hiding something from him.

The few words the head of the Surete had uttered, served as bait. He would have given everything in the world to force the policeman to provide more details.

Mr. Peyroussin made another attempt, saying, “Well, what do people say about Fantomas? Why do they only talk about him in vague terms?”

The question was clear and there was no way to step around it. Mr. Havard grimaced but gave in to the need to reply. Mr. Peyroussin, who enjoyed the security conferred by his nonexistent and useless sinecure, was someone to be handled with kid gloves. It was a good idea to flatter him, to satisfy his curiosity, and it was perilous to send him away unsatisfied, not sated with news.

“Bah!” said Mr. Havard. “People talk vaguely about the Master of Fear because they relate things that are not certain.”

“Such as?”

“I received a report this morning, indicating that Fantomas had passed through the station at Eydtkuhnen. That’s on the Russian-German border...”

“How do they know that?” asked Mr. Peyroussin.

“I have no idea,” replied Mr. Havard.

But that response, which was quite natural, exasperated the civil servant.

“You don’t know? But you’re the head of the Surete! That’s unbelievable! Of course, you’re just trying to be discrete; you’re hiding something from me.”

“No, no, of course not!”

“Yet, if they’re submitted a report on Fantomas, that means he made himself known some way or another. What did the report say?”

Mr. Peyroussin could hardly sit still. He was burning with curiosity, avid to learn something unexpected, something sensational.

Mr. Havard understood that and wanted inasmuch as possible to satisfy the man.

“After all,” thought the head of the Surete, “I’ve said too much to shut up now. If I don’t give this old gossip what he wants, if I’m not indiscrete, he’ll leave here furious. I’ll have to dot the I’s and cross the T’s for him...”

Mr. Havard searched through a stack of papers in a large folder on his desk.

He was looking for a document and said, “My dear Mr. Peyroussin, I’m going to prove to you that you demand too much too soon. In fact, I simply received a telegram, a telegram containing just a few words, one that was not even signed, and that told me very little... Ah, here it is.”

Mr. Havard had located the document in question which had been hard to find, buried as it was in a heap of paperwork.

“Listen to this Peyroussin, you’ll see...”

To the head of the Paris Surete. Fantomas must have crossed the Russian German border at Eydtkuhnen. He is returning to France, without a doubt, with great projects in mind. Be on the lookout!

As Mr. Havard read the telegram, Mr. Peyroussin opened his eyes wide, dumbfounded.

“I don’t understand,” he said. “I don’t understand what this means... Is this a threat?”

“No,” said Mr. Havard, quietly. “It’s a warning.”

And, without raising his voice, without revealing the slightest hint of distress, the head of the Surete continued, “It is likely, at least I think so, that this telegram is from Fandor... you know who I mean, Juve’s friend... the famous Jerome Fandor...”

Mr. Peyroussin was about to reply that he knew perfectly well who Fandor was and that he, like all Parisians, admired the intrepid journalist when there was a discrete known at the door of Mr. Havard’s office, interrupting the two men.

“Enter!” ordered the head of the Surete.

A clerk entered and said, “It’s the mail, sir.”

“Hand it over!”

Mr. Havard automatically took the letters the clerk had brought him, spread them over his desk, glancing at them with a skill acquired over long years of practice, which enabled him to determine if a particular letter was of interest or not.

‘Nothing new?” asked Mr. Peyroussin.

“I don’t think so...”

At that moment, Mr. Havard was thinking that his indiscrete visitor would no doubt leave and give him an opportunity to go through the letters in peace. But that was not the case and, given that line of thought, Mr. Havard was completely unaware of the other man’s real faults. In fact, since the mail had arrived, Mr. Peyroussin had been unable to hold still. He thought that it was more than likely that one of the letters would be of interest. Was he finally going to learn a bit of news, a juicy tale that he would be able to pass on? He gave a very friendly wave of his hand.

“But, don’t let me interrupt you, Havard. Open your mail... Read your letters... I’ll wait... I’m in no rush.”

Mr. Havard smiled and replied, “You’re too kind.”

Yet, at the same time he thought, “May the devil take him! Is that man nailed to his chair?”

Once again, however, he did not have the means to resist. Mr. Havard took a letter opener and started to sort through his correspondence. As he had suspected that his curious visitor was in quite a state, he did everything to satisfy his curiosity, without seeming to do so.

“A letter reporting a theft by servants,” he announced. “A banal affair... Ah, this one contains a denunciation of a gambling den... It doesn’t look serious, a little blackmail... Well now, here’s a letter from a crazy man who writes me every day to ask me for 50 million francs or he will blow of the Palais de l’Elysee...”

Mr. Havard opened another dozen or so letters and pushed the papers away with a weary gesture.

“Nothing, nothing at all!” he said. “How exceptionally boring.”

And, after uttering this declaration, he was about to settle back into his chair when Mr. Peyroussin leapt up, saying, “But you forgot a letter. See, this one...”

He held a brown, rather elegant looking envelope, which had escaped Mr. Havard’s notice.

The chief of the Surete glanced at it, saying, “Oh that can’t be all that important. The paper is good quality. I suppose it is from some snob, informing me that his mistress wants to castigate him... I get about 20 of those a day and, nine times out of ten, the signer doesn’t earn my sympathy...”

Mr. Havard, indifferent, opened the letter. He pulled out a sheet of paper, with strange writing, original, intent, obviously masculine, writing that would certainly draw attention.

“Look at this,” he murmured, glancing at the paper.

Mr. Havard had barely started reading, when his face changed. Abruptly, he stood up, moving so quickly that he turned the large chair in which he had been sitting over.

At the same time, he swore, “In the name of God! In the name of God! In the name of God!”

The usually phlegmatic man’s behavior was so strange, in fact, that Mr. Peyroussin exulted. Obviously, the letter was not unimportant. The news it contained was not unimportant. If that had been the case, Mr. Havard would never have been so upset, so distressed.

Anxiously, Mr. Peyroussin asked, “What is it? What does it...”

But Mr. Havard did not reply right away. The chief of the Surete seemed to have forgotten all about the visitor in his office. He continued to mutter, and seemed to be caught up in the throes of fury.

“Well, look at this... And everything had been so calm... In the name of God! What is he planning now? And Juve isn’t here!”

All of this was most unclear and did nothing to satisfy Mr. Peyroussin’s curiosity.

The civil servant insisted, “Answer me, man! What is it? What has been reported to you? Tell me whatever you see fit. Is it serious?

“Yes, it’s serious!” said Mr. Havard. “It’s frightening! I’m frightened! I must be losing my mind! I wonder...”

But Mr. Havard did not complete his sentence. Once again he swore, saying, “In the name of God! In the name of God! What should I do? What decision shall I make? How can I get out of this hornet's nest? And Juve isn’t here!”

Twice, Mr. Havard had expressed the same distress, demonstrating the confidence he placed in Juve, despite the fact that he did not always express it.

Mr. Peyroussin, however, was growing more and more agitated. Mr. Havard’s attitudes, his curses convinced him that the situation was very serious. Yet, he still knew nothing... Honestly, that was disappointing!

Mr. Peyroussin placed his hand on Mr. Havard’s shoulder and, with an unshakeable composure that seemed somewhat grotesque, he said, “Well now, my friend, confide in me. Something is troubling you, isn’t it? Are you afraid of something? That’s it, isn’t it, you’re afraid of something.”

Mr. Havard looked the other man in the eye and shouted, “Yes, I’m afraid of something. And I’m not the only one who will be afraid. All of Paris will be afraid if the information in this letter is made public. My God! Things were going too well. I should have known it could not last!”

“But what is it?”

Mr. Peyroussin was overcome with curiosity. In actual fact, if Mr. Havard did not give him the news, he would just grab the letter, the letter that the chief of the Surete kept reading over and over without telling him anything.

Mr. Havard seemed to rouse himself as if from a dream. He passed his hand over his forehead, as if trying to shake off a terrible nightmare, and said, “What? What do you want? You want to know what it says? Well, then, here’s what the letter says, Mr. Peyroussin."

Mr. Havard’s voice trembled. It seemed, at times, as if the words caught in his throat, and that he would be unable to articulate clearly. Yet, making a supreme effort, he managed to read:

To the chief of the Surete:

I don't enjoy bad jokes and your forces have just played one on me that I consider detestable. I had set off for Russian and you did not have to concern yourselves with me. But your subordinate, that policeman, took it into his head to hunt me down and it was only by chance that I escaped from his interfering activities.

Sir, my motto has always been ‘an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth'. You meddle in my business, I'll meddle in yours. Moreover, you won't be my only target. All Paris supports Juve when Juve harasses me. So, I'll attack all of Paris!

You can, as a result, sir, inform the people living in the capital, that I am back and that I intend to chastise the city as it deserves to be punished, with a series of formidable attacks.

Please excuse me for treating you like a messenger and please accept my irony.

“It's signed?” Mr. Peyroussin asked, dumbfounded.

“It's signed...” said Mr. Havard, in a low voice, “It’s signed.... Fantomas!”

At that moment, in the large office where so many discussions had concerned the legendary bandit, it truly seemed as if something strange, stupefying, unsettling was upsetting the atmosphere.

Fantomas’ name, all on its own, was the source of the problem.

The tragic syllables had, as usual, a terrifying resonance. They re-awakened echoes, they sounded the death knell, they embodied something darkly mysterious.

“Fantomas! Fantomas!”

As he repeated this name, Mr. Havard bowed his head, thinking that Fantomas was impossible to catch.

Mr. Peyroussin, for his part, was trembling. For him, Fantomas was above all a mad torturer whose refined cruelty rendered all those he captured quite mad.

“Fantomas!” Mr. Peyroussin repeated, in a quiet voice. “Fantomas is the one who wrote to you...”

“Who wrote to threaten me,” Mr. Havard replied. “How can he be so certain, so filled with impunity, that he dares to warn me?”

Instinctively, Mr. Havard and Mr. Peyroussin fell silent, thinking, shivering.

Fantomas!

The sinister name absorbed all their thoughts, petrifying them. After a few seconds, both civil servants shuddered.

The door to the office opened and the indifferent voice of the clerk announced, “Mr. Janvial, sent by the Deputy Chief.”

A visitor entered at the same time. Obviously, it was an important individual who had come to the Prefecture for a rather serious matter since the Deputy Chief who had received him was now sending him to Mr. Havard.

Mr. Havard, however, was in no state to receive guests. He welcomed Mr. Janvial, as he would greet some unwelcome visitor.

“Well, what do you want, sir?”

And he never even thought of asking Mr. Peyroussin to leave and that gentlemen did not even make the pretense of showing such elementary discretion.

Mr. Janvial, however, greeted the head of the Surete with the perfect amount of correctness.

He started by declaring, “I apologize for disturbing you, sir, but it is all the fault of your Deputy Chief, who asked me to come and see you. Does my name mean anything to you?”

“Not at all, sir.”

“Then allow me to introduce myself. I’m the manager of the Jardin d’acclimatation here in Paris and the president of the International

Agricultural Exposition, which should open its doors soon.”

“Excuse me,” Mr. Havard interrupted. “But what exactly do you want? I’m in a bit of a hurry.”

Mr. Janvial smiled scornfully, indicating that he had clearly noted the other man’s lack of manners, and said, “I’ve come to see you, sir, about a robbery.”

“An important one?”

“Worth about 60,000 francs.”

“Well, sir,” replied the chief of the Surete, “Go and see my officers. I’m not the one who handles complaints.”

Mr. Janvial smiled ironically again and said, “Your officers have sent me to you.”

Mr. Havard, who was tapping his foot by now, protested, “Well, now, I can hardly do everything myself! What did they steal from you? Shares?”

“No, sir, chickens.”

Dumbfounded, Mr. Havard replied, “Chickens? I don’t understand. Ordinary chickens? Chickens that lay eggs?”

This time, Mr. Janvial smiled openly and replied, “My chickens lay eggs like other chickens and they are ordinary because all animals are ordinary. Yet, if I understand what you’re thinking, you are astonished by the value I’ve placed on them. So, I’ll tell you that these are extremely rare chickens intended for the upcoming exposition. I’m not exaggerating by placing their value at 60,000 francs.”

Mr. Havard recovered from his surprise and replied, “Good grief! I understand your situation, but I still don’t see what I can do about it. A thief who steels chickens of this kind is a very audacious thief who will not allow himself to be captured easily. Well, we will try. Where did this robbery take place? In Paris?”

“No sir. In Russia.”

Mr. Havard lost his patience and yelled, “In Russia! What do you mean in Russia! What exactly do you want me to do now? I’m not a member of the Russian police forces. You have to be reasonable!”

Mr. Janvial remained calm despite his reception, which had been rather abrupt and not at all in keeping with police etiquette.

Yet, he did protest, “I simply came to the Surete to inquire into the matter. After listening to me, your inspectors told me to see your Deputy Chief and your own Deputy Chief told me to come and see you. I’m not to blame!”

Mr. Havard calmed a little and said, “Well, I accept that. But, once again, what do you want me to do about this matter, this robbery that took place in Russia? Where, in fact, in Russia? Russia is a large country!”

Demonstrating remarkable patience, Mr. Janvial replied, “My chickens had arrived at the border. They disappeared at the Eydtkuhnen station.”

Mr. Janvial had barely finished uttering that name when Mr. Havard rushed at him like a mad man.

“In the name of God!” he shrieked. “But why didn’t you say so? A robbery at the Russian-German border... where Fantomas was... Yes, that does interest me! Go on, go on... What do you know?”

Such enthusiasm, following on the heels of such indifference, most likely surprised the excellent director of the Jardin d’acclimatation.

“What do I know?” he repeated. “Well, not much, just that my hens have disappeared, that’s all. The police are the ones who should be finding the information!”

Discouraged, Mr. Havard fell back into his chair, distraught.

“Ah, the police... the police...” he murmured. “Well they are in wonderful position to provide you with information.”

And he sounded sad as he said that.



CHAPTER III - Black Hens



Just a bit afraid, despite his extraordinary audacity, realizing that the station was under surveillance from all sides and that it would be impossible for him to go unnoticed, Fantomas, wondering how he was going to extricate himself from the unfortunate situation he found himself, had entered one of the large freight terminals and sat down on a crate, staring fixedly at a flock of black hens locked up there, obviously being shipped to some distant recipient.

Fantomas remained in the hangar for a long time.

What was he doing there?

Only those who might have had the audacity to watch the Master of Fear would have been able to guess.

Fantomas, in fact, was able to act mysteriously, cautiously, to erase all traces of his actions, and anyone who had never seen him in action would be incapable of guessing what he thought, what schemes he dreamed up.

An hour passed.

The Northern Express had already left, carrying its passengers, carrying Fandor and Helene. All that remained in the small, deserted station were a few employees going about their usual business, along with a few travelers waiting for the next train, an omnibus train, that was headed for Berlin.

Moreover, no one had any business in the hangar where Fantomas had taken refuge and the bandit stayed there in peace, without fearing any surprises.

Yet, what was Fantomas thinking about and why had he remained there, alone, seemingly waiting for something to happen? Had he come up with a plan to hide long enough that the surveillance would be removed so he would no longer have to fear immediate arrest?

Twice, the miserable wretch had stood up. He had walked over to the hangar door, glanced anxiously at the station platform then, shrugging, had returned to his place.

Fantomas could hardly hope that the police would abandon their surveillance quickly. The troupes sent to the station, in fact, had formed groups. People were now distributing mess tins containing soup to the Cossacks, who were setting up tents. Assuredly, the battalions were planning on camping there; assuredly the orders they had been given were harsh. The government would not stop its surveillance until Fantomas had been arrested or until they had made sure that he had managed to leave Russia.

“Obviously, they’ve decided to take me dead or alive, this time!”

But he burst out laughing.

“Juve hasn’t caught me yet. I haven’t quite made my mind up to make my acquaintance with Diebier’s knife!”

Then, he hunkered down in one of the darkest spots in the hangar. Had he decided to fight the police with patience? Was he planning to wait there until the police left? Did he want to hide like an evil beast in the deserted hangar?

That, obviously, was Fantomas’ secret and nothing would give it away. The man remained motionless, fading into the shadows, so stiff that he looked like a statue, except for the occasional wild gleam, the fiery spark, that flashed from his eyes.

Then, Fantomas soon abandoned his immobility.

“What’s there?” he murmured. “Is someone coming... could it be the guide?”

But he provided no further details about the person he referred to with that mysterious term. Soon, there was no longer any doubt. Someone was definitely coming into the hangar. His footsteps could be heard. It was no doubt a station employee. In any case, it was someone who was taking no precaution to hide his arrival and who, believing himself to be alone, whistled a popular tune as he walked.

Fantomas, who had remained seated, knelt down behind a crate, taking care not to be seen. The person who was approaching could, in fact, be an enemy. He must take care not to reveal his presence unless it was necessary.

The man who had entered the hangar kept advancing. Soon, Fantomas could make out his silhouette. It was a tall, thin man wearing a helmet. He had both hands in his pockets and an unlit cigarette dangled at the corner of his mouth. He walked with the shambling gait of someone who was up to no good. The man walked on and on and Fantomas, eyes burning, did not miss a single movement.

A breath of terror washed over the large hangar, the dark hangar, with its insufficient lighting, provided by two feeble oil lamps... The man who had been walking calmly might have felt it. He stopped suddenly, turned about, and looked in every direction. He was no longer whistling. He had suddenly fallen silent, then said, in a strange voice, "Damn, this is not a cheerful place!”

A few moments later, he added, “And that’s not all! Where are my hens?”

The individual took a few more steps, then turned right. A row of bulky bundles hampered his progress. He climbed onto them nimbly, then started to walk over them.

Fantomas continued to watch him.

The hangar was completely silent except for the noise made by the walker. Soon he stopped.

“Well, here you are my chicks. How are you my black girls!?”

He bent down over the crate that Fantomas had looked at earlier, the crate containing the black chickens. Now, as the man looked at the birds, as he took pleasure in kicking the crate with the tip of his foot, moving it, the stranger was suddenly overcome with wild terror.

His feeling was, in fact, quite justified. At that moment as he bent over the crate, he felt a heavy hand, a nervous hand press on his shoulder and grasp it, forcing him to stand up.

“Good God!” he cursed.

And a voice replied, “Good day.”

The man, however, suddenly escaped from the grip that had so startled him. He was furious.

“Well, pal!" he said. “You’ve got some strange manners. What’s up with you? What do you want with me? My ticket? You a controller? They’re a dime a dozen in this country!”

As he spoke, the chicken man was searching through his pockets for his ticket. It was so dark, in fact, in the hangar that he could not see the face of the other man, who stood completely still, arms crossed, and stared.

The chicken man, who had finally found his ticket, looked up and saw, in the black silhouette of the man who had accosted him, two eyes, burning like coals.

“Here’s my ticket...” he started to say.

The other man interrupted him, waving the ticket away and saying, in a deep voice, “Good day.”

Suddenly the chicken man shuddered. He took three steps back. He was no longer thinking about his ticket. Arms dangling, head bent forward, he said, “No, but... sometimes... What have I got myself into?”

For the third time, the other man said, “Good day!”

The chicken man, hearing the voice again, that deep voice, literally started to tremble. Words caught in his throat and he had a great deal of difficulty saying, “Who are you? Who are you?”

“Guess!” said the man.

“I don’t dare.”

“So, look.”

The man who was speaking took an automatic lighter from his pocket and clicked. The small wick caught fire and a bright flash lit up his face for a second.

“Do you recognize me?”

The chicken man’s teeth chattered as he said, “Fantomas! Fantomas!”

He stammered the name, overcome, dumbfounded by fear.

After a moment, and appearing unable to believe the truth, he asked, “Surely, I must be having a nightmare. It can’t be you! You’re not Fantomas!”

He received an answer filled with scorn.

“Imbecile! Do I have to prove my identity? Don’t you recognize your Master? Will I have to throw you to Juve just to get rid of an idiot like you?”

The other repeated, “Fantomas!”

Since silence fell between the two men. Fantomas suddenly seemed to arrive at a decision.

“Listen,” he started. “I knew you were stupid but not to this extent! You had no idea I was here?”

“No, Master, no.”

“And why exactly did you think the station is being guarded by soldiers? Tell me!”

“Master, I didn’t know.”

Fantomas shrugged and replied, “You never know anything!”

Then, voice dripping with scorn, he asked, “But what are you doing here? How did you get to Russia?”

The chicken man seemed to be finding it difficult getting over the terror that had filled him when he faced Fantomas, the man he dared call master.

He replied, in a voice that still trembled, “Well, now... that's quite a story... And it will take some time to tell... It’s all because Degueulasse broke his pipe, dismantled his stove, took off his shirt, turned over his innards... in other words, he kicked the bucket, slipped into the bottom of the hole poor Degueulasse did!”

“What?” asked Fantomas.

“Well, continued the chicken man, when I saw my comrade turned into a carcass, I said, well I’ll have to see about this, old Fumier,m it might be time to retire. I have a job.”

“A job?” Fantomas scoffed. “Who would want to hire you, Fumier?”

And Fumier, since that was the name of the man, who had been the inseparable companion of Degueulasse, who had recently died of delirium tremens, the man who now found himself in Russia, explained, “Well, it’s not a very lofty position, of course. Not like being a minister! But, it’s a job that doesn’t mess up your mind. So, now, I’m what could be called the butler for the animals at the Jardin d’acclimatation.”

Fantomas shrugged.

“A farm butler!” he said. “That’s what you’ve become. Obviously, my pour Fumier, you were hardly worthy to serve under my orders... For a former criminal, you’ve come to a sad end.”

Fumier did not respond.

Fantomas asked, “So, you’re an employee of the Jardin d’acclimatation? Well. But why are you in Russia?”

Fumier replied, saying, “That, boss, is a most entertaining story. It concerns those hens that you hear clucking like a band of politicians. Black hens are rare. They’re to go to the Exposition that is to be held. Mr. Janvial sent me to Russia to get them.”

Fumier grew more reassured as he spoke. After all, or so he thought, he no longer had to fear Fantomas. He no longer had anything in common with the bandit who kept the whole world in fear. He no longer had to take orders from the man. Fumier was telling the truth when he claimed that he had gone straight. For the time being, in fact, Degueulasse’s former companion had honest intentions. He had been employed by the Jardin d’acclimatation, as he has just recounted, he was earning his living and he was free.

Yet, as he listened to the other man, Fantomas burst into laughter. It seemed that the abominable Master of Fear found Fumier’s repentance and new life most entertaining.

Abruptly, he asked, “So, they sent you so far from Paris, simply to accompany these chickens?”

“That’s right, boss.”

“And you think you’re going to take them back there?”

“Damn,” Fumier said, taken aback.

“You’re wrong,” declared Fantomas.

The bandit gave Fumier no time to protest. With a wave of his hand, he interrupted the exclamation uttered by his former accomplice.

He asked, “How tall are you?”

“5 ft 6 in..”

“Do you have your passport?”

“Of course! Why?”

“Because...” Fantomas replied, in an enigmatic tone.

The bandit had just extinguished his lighter. The two men once again found themselves in the dark. Fumier could not, as a result, see the sinister expression on Fantomas’ face.

Still, he said, “Master, I don’t understand... You ask me questions, in all due respect, that make no sense. And what does it matter to you that they sent me to Russia to pick up some chickens?”

At that moment, Fantomas took a step forward He placed his mouth next to Fumier’s ear and in a low, gentle voice, he said, “My friend, you’re wrong. They didn’t send you to Russia to pick up your chickens.”

“Why did they send me here, then, boss?”

Abruptly, in an authoritarian voice, Fantomas said, “They sent you here to die!”

And the unfortunate Fumier had no time to do anything, had no time to move. He fell back, his throat ripped open, possibly dead...

Fantomas assuredly was still the terrifying assassin whose misdeeds had spread around the world. He was still the skillful murderer who never trembles, who never hesitates, who kills without fail, without pity and with mercy!

In the fortunate darkness, he had raised his right hand, armed with a thin knife. The unsuspecting Fumier had met his maker. With a rapid movement, Fantomas struck him and, with a single blow, had inflicted one of those terrible blows that he mastered so well.

He slit the other man’s throat, cutting through the carotid artery. Then he dug through the bloody opening with the tip of his dagger, reached the top of the man’s lung, tore through his larynx. Fumier died without making a sound...

Fantomas showed no emotion. Quietly, he spoke to himself, as he usually did, saying “Now that’s a good deed. If I believed in God, I would thank the Lord for looking on me favorably. I won’t have the slightest difficulty... Now, I must act quickly.”

Fantomas lit his lighter again. He knelt at the feet of the motionless man and, meticulous as always, he wiped the blood coated blade of his knife on the coat worn by the still warm cadaver.

“No point leaving any compromising traces behind me. It would be just as pointless abandoning this dagger. I may still need it, after all...” he murmured as he placed the knife back in his pocket.

And Fantomas set down to a horrible task. With complete indifference, in fact, the wretch started to take his victim’s coat off and then searched through the pockets. Naturally, there was a bit of everything in those pockets. Sugar cubes stolen from restaurants, cigarette butts picked up in the streets, broken matches, a pipe without a stem, a bread crust. Fantomas even discovered a bit of rotting, stinking meat, wrapped in paper.

“Nothing in the coat,” said Fantomas, throwing the macabre cast-off on the ground. “Where the devil could he have hidden what I need?”

He suddenly slapped his forehead and said, “I’m such an imbecile. He was holding it in his hand!”

With a kick of his foot, Fantomas pushed the body of the unfortunate Fumier, which continued to spill blood, along the floor.

“As long as it’s not soiled!” Fantomas grumbled. “I have nothing with me to remove compromising stains. Well, when it comes down to it, I could simply cut my hand and mix my own blood with that imbecile’s.”

As he spoke, Fantomas seemed to be searching for something on the ground.

“Ah! Here’s what I was looking for!”

In the circle of light cast by his small tool, he had just noticed a greasy notebook that had fallen to the ground. Most likely Fumier’s wallet. It had fallen there, quite naturally, just as the unfortunate man’s throat was cut since Fumier, at that moment, was still holding the ticket he had had initially wanted to give to Fantomas, presuming he was a railway employee.

Fantomas, however, had already picked up the greasy wallet. He leafed through the bills, and then took out two papers, which he examined with satisfaction.

“Better and better!” Fantomas murmured. “Here’s the waybill for the chickens. Oh, now here’s something interesting... Here’s Fumier’s ticket.... And, and this is his passport. Luck is with me!”

Fantomas rubbed his hands in delight. His plan was a very simple one. Didn’t he always carry a few make-up accessories with him, tools of the trade that he used so successfully? In just a few seconds, he would transform himself, until he looked like poor, dead Fumier. And, that done, he would have no problem escaping from the station. Fumier was his size. He would take his place. The description on the passport, vague as all such descriptions are, made his task easy.

“I’ll pass,” murmured Fantomas. 'Til pass without any difficulty and all Juve’s precautions will be worth nothing...”

The bandit, however, could not spend any more time in the hangar. He would be exposed if an employee chanced by. If someone entered, they would discover Fumier’s body, see the blood on the floor, and the situation would become very complicated.

But Fantomas was not a man to worry for so little. Skillfully, with surprising strength, he managed, in fact, to move some of the voluminous bundles that filled the hangar. And once he had done that he had no difficulty hiding Fumier’s body under a stack of materials. He used crates, dragged by force over the traces of blood, to cover everything and hide it from all eyes.

Fantomas congratulated himself, saying, “They’ll only discover this tomorrow, or the next day... or the next. And I’ll be far away!”

Then he started to apply his make-up. He started with a wig to change the look of his face, applied a foundation to imitate Fumier’s muddy complexion. Varnish, a few wisps of mustache, completed with a few fortunate lines drawn with a grease pencil completed the transformation. And, without a hint of repulsion, indifferent to the macabre aspect of his disguise, Fantomas put on the dead man’s coat, congratulating himself on the precaution he had taken earlier, wiping his dagger on the lining of that piece of clothing.

“Obviously, I’m ready," Fantomas said.

He seemed to pause for a few seconds.

But Fantomas did not wait long. Chance, once again, seemed to smile favorably on his criminal plans.

The wretch had barely completed his transformation when a train arrived at the station. It was the omnibus train people had been waiting for. Droves of travelers disembarked and raced toward Customs, toward the Holy Images, toward the corridor that led to the German station.

Fantomas stood up.

“Now is the time,” he said. “Now is the time to risk everything... Well, let's go!”

And he did something strange. Fantomas shouldered the large crate containing the chickens. Obviously, it was the final element in his disguise. It made him look like he was a porter, carrying the cage. Had he not also taken the waybill from Fumier? He walked through the hangar door without difficulty. The crowd was milling about in front of the Customs office. Fantomas walked by.

“No luggage?"

“Yes, this crate.”

The two tax collectors placed their chalk mark on the crate.

“And the search?” one of them asked. “Have you been searched?”

Fantomas dared to lie, saying, “And how! What a strange matter, little father!”

He looked so at ease, so quiet, that the Russian customs clerk did not insist. Moreover, the surveillance was easing. The guards were much less severe with the travelers from the omnibus train that they had been with those from the luxury train.

“Go on! Go on! Hurry up!”

Along with the other travelers, Fantomas headed into the corridor where they all had to greet the icon.

An officer approached him saying, “Your passport?”

“Here it is.”

At that moment, possibly the bandit might have experienced a slight emotion. He was obviously at the mercy of the slightest incident. If the officer noted something strange about the paper he had been given, if he noticed a difference in the description, no doubt the most terrible complications could arise at any moment.

But Fantomas was not a man to take fright for so little. He had prepared his plan. In the event of danger, in the event of surveillance, he would leap at the officer, stab the man, then jump over the barrier and run off through the fields.

They would chase after him, of course, that was inevitable. But how many times had he escaped from similar manhunts?

But nothing like that happened.

The officer who had been examining passports since the morning was starting to feel somewhat blase. So, he looked at Fantomas’ passport quickly, making sure the stamps were in order, then ordered, “Move on!”

And Fantomas moved on.

He was no longer in Russia, but in Germany. He no longer had to fear the trap set by Juve.

Despite himself, perhaps, he sighed, saying “Well that was a bit unpleasant, but I got through it just the same.”

He was still carrying his crate of chickens. He calmly had it checked for the trip to Berlin. Then he climbed into a car.

And Fantomas, who was once again an ordinary traveler, who had completely forgotten about the murder he had committed, started leafing through the notebook he had stolen from Fumier.

He said, “What the devil could Fumier be noting down? What mind-boggling discovery will I find in the memoires of that alarming individual?

In actual fact, Fantomas thought that he would find some picturesque detail in the greasy notebook. All he saw was a single comment. It was not actually written in Fumier’s handwriting. It was not as insignificant as Fantomas might suppose.

The bandit read it over and over again.

“Oh,” he murmured. “This is interesting to know... La Toulouche is getting out of the central prison in Rennes in three days. I’ll have to see her.”

And, in a mysterious tone of voice, he added, “Good grief. La Toulouche will be an excellent nanny for some of my students!”



CHAPTER IV - Chicken Coop



“You there, try to arrange your baggage and follow me to the office, without causing any scandal!”

“Fine, fine, don’t worry, I don’t feel like grumbling today..

“That will be a change for you, then.”

“I don’t know if it will be a change for me, it’s quite natural. Do you think I’m going to risk getting extra time? Well, I’m not grumbling. But, dear sir, your wish is my command. If I have to embrace you, I’ve decided that’s what I’ll do, just to get things over with faster.”

This was Mere Toulouche demonstrating extraordinary good will. Moreover, the old woman, just as she had said, seemed uninclined to raise her voice against anyone or anything at all.

She docilely obeyed the order that had just been given to her, she wrapped the few rags that lay on the floor around her in a large piece of dark brown paper.

But what was happening? Who was Mere Toulouche talking to and who was she offering to kiss, a truly desirable favor?

Mere Toulouche was in a narrow, dark room, a dark cell, walls oozing with moisture, in the central prison of Rennes.

That was easy to explain.

Mere Toulouche had been arrested many times. She had already been implicated in a number of shady affairs. She had been convicted of receiving stolen goods, associating with criminals and, on many occasions, the authorities had been able to prove that she did not turn down her nose at a little robbery.

Justice had not hesitated. As Mere Toulouche said herself, she’d been shown no mercy. She’d been sentenced to three years in the central prison and had just finished her time.

But, even for the most hardened criminals, arrangements can be made with the law. La Toulouche had served part of her sentence in isolation. Then she had earned the right to be transferred to a cell which, by rights, had reduced her entire sentence by half. And, finally, Mere Toulouche, a good negotiator, had managed to develop a good relationship with the prison staff. Not only had she managed to obtain some of those small favors that made her stay in prison more bearable, but everyone had agreed to put her name of the list of the convicts who behaved well and were, as a result, entitled to a reduced sentence.

There had been so many reductions in fact, that just 10 months after entering the central prison in Rennes, La Toulouche was being released on parole! And the word parole caused her no concern. La Toulouche had spent far too long in prison to take umbrage over the restrictive meanings of the word.

Good grief! It cost the State so much to keep prisoners locked up that it had no desire to hold them any longer than necessary.

And as La Toulouche said to herself, proving that she was quite familiar with the current customs, “When they kick you out of prison, there’s no danger that they’ll haul you back in, unless you get caught!”

Furthermore, she had no illusions about being arrested again, within a relatively near future.

La Toulouche did not pretend to be repentant as she left the central prison. She left the jail filled with shame that she had been stupid enough to have been busted and filled with the hope that, in the future, she would be able to avoid such a misfortune, despite that fact that she would deserve it.

Moreover, despite everything, La Toulouche was quite pleased. The idea of leaving the central prison, of no longer being restricted, the thought that she could, when she felt it, take a little nip made her heart truly light.

“No more,” she repeated to the guard who was waiting to take her to the office. “I won’t grumble anymore. Good grief, You’re all good guys here. But that doesn’t matter. I’m leaving the hotel without any regrets. Being locked up just isn’t for me. A temperament like mine needs fresh air...”

La Toulouche accompanied these words with a short, satisfied chuckle. She finished folding her rags and finally said, “That’s it. My bags are packed. Let’s go to the office!”

And a few minutes later she found herself in a bright clean office where papers were signed and prisoners were brought in and later released. Once she reached the office, La Toulouche’s attitude changed.

She wasn’t comfortable with the quality of the employees. To a certain extent, like all authorities, they intimidated her somewhat. La Toulouche assumed a stupid expression, adopted the manner of a suitable woman, and behaved appropriately. Moreover, the formalities did not take a long time. They started by having her sign a receipt for her effects, which had been placed in the locker room. Then, they gave her the wages, the nest egg she had earned by working in the prison, about 38 francs. Finally, they gave her a form, suggesting that she read it carefully.

“It contains instructions you have to follow,” the guard said in his monotone voice. “You’ll notice that you are forbidden to go to Paris. At the same time, you will be under police surveillance. You’ll see that, if you want to work, the form contains instructions about the patrons that will be responsible for finding work for you. Understand?”

“Yes, sir. Of course, sir.”

La Toulouche folded the paper respectfully, despite her determination to disregard it completely.

They forbade her to go to Paris! They gave her contacts for finding work! What else? Was she going to be obliged to go to confession?

Yet, as she thought these subversive thoughts, La Toulouche bent over, in an ultra-long bow.

“Am I free to go?” she asked.

“Yes, the guard will lead you out.”

La Toulouche bowed again, saying, “Goodbye gentlemen. It’s been a pleasure.”

She couldn't help but laugh at those words. Honestly, it was such a joke, saying goodbye as she left her jailers...

Of course, she hoped she wouldn’t meet them again immediately. They could all die... She didn’t care.

But once again, La Toulouche said nothing. The guard walked ahead of her, holding a form in one hand. He took her to the caretaker’s room, spoke with the doorman, and had the door opened.

“That’s it,” he said. “You’re free. Be off with you.”

“I will, old man.”

And, despite her large frame, La Toulouche was suddenly as agile as a young girl. She stepped through the door and found herself in the large square at Rennes.

“Ah! Freedom!” she said. “I’ve got 38 francs in my pocket. What a binge I’m going on tonight!”

And she immediately looked around for some bar where she could order a thick absinthe without sugar.

Now, La Toulouche had barely walked 20 yards across the square when she noticed a superb closed vehicle, parked a short distance away. A man was leaning out of the window, calling and waving.

“Drat,” La Toulouche chuckled. “If I had just a dash of vanity, I could almost believe that he wants to see me. But that can’t be right. I have no high-placed connections.”

And she was about to continue on her way when the calls rang out again. La Toulouche stopped short, dumbfounded.

“But what does that man want?” she asked out loud. “Who the hell can it be?”

She walked over to the car.

Yet, as she reached the vehicle and was close enough to see the individual who had settled into the back of the seat, she was overwhelmed with amazement.

“Oh! Good grief! Fantomas! Can he have come to pick me up?”

She reached for the door.

Trembling, and with a slobbery smile on her lips, she asked, “Is that really you, boss? What do you want with me?"

“You'll know soon enough, replied Fantomas. “Get in."

La Toulouche got in.

Fantomas was alone in the car. The engine was purring slowly, quietly, smoothly. With a push on the pedal, Fantomas accelerated.

“What do you want with me?” La Toulouche asked again.

“Shut up!” retorted the Master of Fear. “You’ll know soon enough. Sit down.”

The Master of Torture shifted into gear just then. Fantomas was an excellent driver. His audacity and composure served him marvelously well when it came to automobile sports which, more than any other, requires energy, skill and the ability to think quickly.

So, the car was speeding down the streets, tacking back and forth through the neighborhoods of Rennes, winding through the peasants’ carts. Then it left the city, traveled through the suburbs, headed past La Guerche de Bretagne and raced past fields, along the deserted route, devouring space at a crazy speed.

Up to that point, La Toulouche had not said a word, mute with amazement First of all, she had been deeply surprised when she recognized

Fantomas. Then, she was further amazed to find herself sitting in a such a luxurious vehicle.

But, another problem caught her attention.

In front of her, at her feet, there was a crate. A rather large crate, sides pierced with holes. Fantomas had instructed her not to jostle it.

What could be in that crate?

Obviously, it had to be some kind of animal since it jiggled now and then. La Toulouche was still wondering what all this meant when Fantomas suddenly changed his attitude.

Nervously, the Master of Fear applied the brakes. He did so violently, like a wealthy man who obviously doesn’t care for the expensive damage he is causing to his pneumatic system.

Immediately after that, Fantomas spoke to his passenger.

“La Toulouche?” he asked.

“Yes, Master,” the old woman stammered.

“I have two pieces of news for you.”

“Fine. What?”

“First, you’re going to have to head for Paris right away.”

“That’s not news,” La Toulouche grumbled. “That’s an order.”

Fantomas smiled when he heard that comment.

“The second is that Fumier is dead.”

La Toulouche opened her eyes wide. Of course, she knew both Degueulasse and Fumier. She also knew that Degueulasse had already passed away and she was not particularly surprised to learn that Fumier had given up the ghost as well. No, what surprised her was that Fantomas was the one giving her this news. What was his interest in the matter?

And La Toulouche, who always spoke her mind, even with Fantomas, dared to ask, “Fumier croaked? Fine! What's that to do with me, Fantomas?”

Fantomas could not help but smile again. And, although he was driving a full speed, he was quite at ease conversing, and he deigned to explain, “It means, La Toulouche, that it is dangerous not to obey me blindly. Fumier has been killed, by my own hand... Understand?”

This time, La Toulouche looked down. She understood full well. If Fantomas was talking like this, it was obvious that he was trying to ensure her obedience; that he was about to give her an important order and that he wanted to make sure, in advance, that she would follow his instructions faithfully.

“Fine, fine,” grumbled La Toulouche. “I understand, Master. So?”

Fantomas frowned and said, “Well, I’ve got a mission for you.”

“What is it?”

Fantomas smiled enigmatically and answered, “I don’t like people asking me questions.”

After a brief silence, he continued, saying, “La Toulouche, we’re five miles from a railway station. I’ll take you there. You’ll catch a train and you’ll go back to Paris.”

“That’s fine with me,” grumbled La Toulouche. “Although I would have liked a drink this evening.”

“Shut up!” interrupted Fantomas.

The Master of Torture gave La Toulouche such an evil glare that she did not dare say anything else.

He said, “You’ll take the train, but you won’t take it alone. You will take this crate with you.”

“Fine, Master.”

“In that crate there are two hens, two black hens...”

La Toulouche looked at Fantomas, eyes filled with wonder, and said, “Two black hens? But what am I supposed to do with them?”

At that moment Fantomas stopped his car. He leaned over toward La Toulouche, stared her in the eyes, in that imperious manner so characteristic of him that inspired his accomplices to follow his slightest order to the latter.

“You will do nothing with the chickens,” said Fantomas. “You will do nothing at all. You will keep them, you will raise them...”

And since La Toulouche was so surprised she could think of no reply, Fantomas continued, ironically, “These chickens are a souvenir from Fumier... Do you understand that they are more valuable to me than my own eyes? They must not be stolen. They must not disappear!”

As he opened the car doom, he said, “Listen to what I’m saying, La Toulouse. They must not...”

Then he waved his arm at a bunch of trees nearby.

“Go now. The station is just beyond those trees.”

La Toulouche got down onto the road carrying the crate holding the black hens. Fantomas disappeared well before she got over her surprise. He accelerated his car suddenly and the car raced off, its engine joyfully purring, raising clouds of dust and dead leaves in a whirlwind.

At five o’clock in the evening, three days later, the excellent Thibault, sole owner, manager and sponsor of the large Folies-Francaises theater, got out of a car, smiling as he usually did.

Mr. Thibault was an optimist. He had done nothing with his life, but had still managed to make a nice fortune. He had, in fact, enjoyed the unexpected opportunity of inheriting successively from two rich uncles he had never met. This double inheritance had enabled him to marry a young girl with a large dowry who had passed away after three years of marriage, namely after living just the amount of time it took to bury her own parents and inherit their estate!

Mr. Thibault, who was not the least bit crushed by these successive fortunes, had invested his money as a good father would, although he had fathered no children and could make no claim to that title.

Yet, luck is blind and Mr. Thibault’s fortunes were enriched through lucky draws. The first time, he won 300,000 francs and the second time, 250,000.

Obviously, the honorable man could, after these successive bits of good fortune, well believe that money was easy to earn and that only imbeciles failed to die millionaires.

However, despite his beliefs, Mr. Thibault was no longer on the path of the future. In fact, this man whom luck had smiled on, was well on his way to ruin. After winning a tidy fortune, without lifting a finger, he had spent the past six months, working like a man possessed, to become penniless. His misfortune arrived on the day that he had discovered an unexceptional bit of information and decided that he was good at business. Mr. Thibault came from a modest background. He had earned a degree with difficulty and proudly showed off a first in gymnastics that he had earned about 15 years earlier.

But that did not prevent Mr. Thibault from being convinced that his knowledge was universal. He claimed to be looking for good deals like a dog tracks down game. He judged the government ministries, organized the future war and, above all, despised the Academie francaise, which he believed was made up of 40 hopeless men who had achieved fame through their wives.

Mr. Thibault did nothing. He was bored. When he grew excessively bored, he went to the theater. As a result of going to the theater, he knew a certain number of swindlers who immediately sensed in him what could only be called an excellent “sucker”.

Immediately, they convinced Mr. Thibault, that he was exceptionally intelligent. Then, things went quickly. The swindlers recognized one another, organized and set up a company to take charge of the sucker.

At that point, Mr. Thibault stunned those close to him. This was a time when he started to judge playwrights, to treat them like dear colleagues, to treat them like close friends and to demonstrate that they were all quite inferior to him.

His close friends, naturally, gossiped. They accused Mr. Thibault of being quite mad. Then one day, wagging tongues fell silent. The media had published a sensational bit of news and Mr. Thibault was the man of the hour.

Quite simply, the imbecile, pushed by his board of directors, had purchased the Folies-Francaises!

The Folies-Francaises was one of those theaters, like so many in Paris, that seemed perpetually destined to drive their owners to ruin. Regardless of who managed them, regardless of the plays they put on, regardless of whether the spectators came to hoot or applaud, their financial results were always deplorable.

Moreover, this was easily explained by the fact that the operating costs were enormous and it was essentially impossible to make a profit.

Mr. Thibault should have noticed this.

After the first year, the self-made theater manager, in fact, should have been most upset when he saw the deficit created by his unfortunate management.

Another man would have been discouraged; he persevered.

“I’ll work twice as hard,” he said.

The result was that he lost twice as much money since he produced twice as many plays.

Yet, Mr. Thibault's activity knew no limits. He never stopped working. He stunned theater goers with the events he took on. And, quite naturally, the Folies-Francaises lost a little more money each year.

The game continued for three years.

Mr. Thibault was starting to be a little short of income, yet he continued to smile. On the other hand, the swindlers that surrounded him were almost all very rich and advised him to sell the business thinking, no doubt, that they would share in the assets that would become available.

Nevertheless, Mr. Thibault continued to smile.

He kept on smiling as he arrived at the Folies-Francaises, and raced joyfully over to the employee who handled ticket sales.

“Well,” he asked. “Is the house full? Lots of spectators for this evening?”

The employee looked at him quietly and replied, “No one, sir.”

Despite his optimism. Mr. Thibault grimaced as he said, “No one? Really? That’s impossible! No one has bought tickets?”

“Yes, sir. But there’s really no point talking about it, I’ve got six reservations.”

Suddenly, Mr. Thibault relaxed.

“Well, six reservations, that’s something already. You said there was no one. Good grief, we’ve already got six reservations!”

And the ineffable theater manager walked off to his office, smiling. He was particularly fond of his office. All of the walls were covered with portraits of actresses, with warm dedications. And that was easy enough to understand. Mr. Thibault always paid three times more than other theater managers.

Moreover, the room was comfortable, discrete, silent. There were excellent sofas for sleeping... And it was so easy to doze off in this room. As soon as he arrived, Mr. Thibault immediately threw himself onto a chair, while contemplating a difficult calculation.

“Let's see!” he thought. “I have six people in the room... How many more people do I need so that I can make money?”

But that was a difficult, perhaps impossible, calculation and Mr. Thibault gave up.

The manager of the Folies-Francaises gave up all the more willingly since someone knocked at his door. A stage manager poked his head in.

“Are you the boss?”

“Yes.”

“Someone is asking for you.”

“An author? Send him packing!”

“It’s not an author.”

“An actor then? Tell him we’re not hiring.”

“Not that either, boss.”

“A friend perhaps? Give him two fold-up seats and tell him we’re sold out.”

The stage manager did not respond this time for the excellent reason that he had disappeared, violently pulled backward by someone who familiarly opened the door and stepped into the manager’s office.

“It’s my honor, sir...” he started to say. But he did not continue.

Mr. Thibault, outraged by the inopportune indiscretion of this fellow leapt to his feet, asking, “Who are you? What do you want?”

The other simply replied, “I bring you fortune, sir!”

At that, the manager of the Folies-Francaises gave a friendly bow and said, “That’s fine. I was waiting for you... Sit down.”

A moment later, Mr. Thibault and his visitor were excellent friends.

The man who claimed to be bringing fortune used words that immediately won Mr. Thibault over.

“Sir,” said the stranger. “I have come to see you because I believe that you are the most intelligent of all theater managers..

Mr. Thibault bowed his head at that.

“And the one that makes the least profits...”

Mr. Thibault looked up.

“But, most certainly the one who will make even more!”

Mr. Thibault bowed low again.

However, the individual who expressed such words was sinking deeper and deeper into his chair as he said, “So, sir, you are going to make a great deal of money because, based on my own calculations, there are 200,000 young people in Paris at least who are running after an heiress’ dowry!”

At this point, Mr. Thibault stood up, concerned.

“I’m dealing with a mad man,” he thought.

His visitor reassured him.

“These 200,000 young people,” he continued. “I have an infallible way of bringing them to your theater. Do you want me to present my plan to you? I would like to add that if, as I promise, I find the means to bring 200,000 people to your facility, namely if I organize a full house night after night for close to a month, it will only be fair if I receive a certain percentage... I will ask you for one and a half percent of gross earnings. Is that too much?”

Mr. Thibault was dumbfounded.

“You will have two!” he replied, generous as always. “However, I don’t understand you at all... How will you do this?”

“Child’s play,” continued the individual. “Read this.”

He took a piece of paper from his wallet and handed it to Mr. Thibault.

A young girl with a dowry worth one million, fairly pretty, truly intelligent, independent but as strong as required, raised by a guardian whose name alone guarantees good morals, would like to wed a young man, even a poor one, but truly intelligent, a young man with a good heart, sentimental. To avoid the banality of a mundane marriage, this young girl, accompanied by her tutor, will be in Box 22 at the Folies-Francaises theater, every evening. All young people likely to be interested in this announcement may view her discretely before writing to K.B., General Delivery, Station 22.

Mr. Thibault read the paper without understanding.

“And?” he asked.

“And, his visitor replied impatiently. “It’s as clear as the nose on your face! There won’t be anyone in Box 22. But I guarantee that the day after this announcement is published, your theater will be packed. First, there will be the naive types who believe the announcement. Then there will be the vicious ones who expect some sort of swindle... There will be the curious who, out of boredom, will come to see what’s going on. There will be the revelers who will drop by in the hopes of taking part in an entertaining encounter... Finally, there will be everyone who is anybody in Paris, most of whom are imbeciles, and who will, quite naturally, act as a single man. Do you agree, Mr. Thibault?”

“Completely!” replied the manager of the Folies-Francaises, who was an exceptional speaker. “I agree completely! Your idea is marvelous! The month will be a great success!”

“You must pay me 50 francs,” replied the individual. “That’s the price for the announcement. I’m an ingenious man, but I don’t have a cent...”

Mr. Thibault paid him.



CHAPTER V - Report from La Capitale



“All the same, they’re going to be a bit impressed when they see me! I did, in fact, drop them, the excellent comrades... It’s been some time now since I went over to the newspaper.”

Fandor was talking to himself, smiling, as he climbed, with his usual haste, up the stairs that led to the editorial room of La Capitale.

Jerome Fandor was not wrong in supposing that his arrival could result in total amazement at the newspaper.

Times had changed, in fact, since the time when Jerome Fandor had been a star reporter who, every day, with amazing punctuality, went to the office to get his orders from his chief of information.

Life had upset that orderly existence. Fandor had taken part in the most surprising, the most unlikely adventures and, while continuing the fight against Fantomas, he had been forced to give up his regular activities with La Capitale.

Fandor was, however, still a journalist. He still belonged to the same large newspaper that had been founded and managed so successfully by poor Mr. Dupoint de PAube who had since been assassinated by the terrifying Fantomas.

The only difference was that, instead of being one of the regular reporters, the journalists who, day in and day out, submitted their reports, Fandor was considered an independent reporter, which gave him all the freedom he needed.

He didn’t take orders from anyone, he did whatever he saw fit, he investigated topics that interested him and he brought his reports back, when he thought of it, to the newspaper.

It was moreover accurate to say that Fandor had benefited, even monetarily, from this arrangement.

Bit by bit, in fact, his adventures had earned him a great deal of renown that clung to his name and gave him a halo of celebrity.

The public did not consider Fandor merely a skilled journalist; he was above all, as a close friend of Juve, the relentless adversary of the Criminal Mastermind and that meant that at La Capitale they truly wanted to retain his services.

Since the best way to keep people is to remunerate them generously, no one skimped when it came to Fandor. The reports prepared by Helene’s husband were paid for generously and, as a result, the journalist was able to live easily, without worrying about the next day, and without having to work his fingers to the bone, which is the usual fate of those who slave for the daily newspapers.

Jerome Fandor, moreover, only brought La Capitale for its articles about Fantomas and this had been the case for some time.

Since he had married Helene, in fact, events had taken place so quickly, so feverishly, that he had had no time to take care of anything else.

Increasingly, he was Fantomas' reporter and he accepted that role, not as an apologist, but as a conscientious writer, preparing a formidable repertory against a wretch and nailing a being that deserved no pity to the pillory of public opinion.

And Jerome Fandor had no illusions about the importance of his job.

He had no doubt that one day or another he would win a definitive victory against Fantomas. And that day, they would arrest the monster and take him before the courts and no doubt the jurors, like the members of the Court, would find it useful to leaf through the collection of his articles to document that many facts for which the accused would be required to pay dearly.

However, that morning, as he headed to La Capitale, Fandor was not thinking about Fantomas.

He had arrived a few days earlier in France with Helene. And had been very occupied settling in the young woman who, suffering a little, had not wanted to remain in the heart of Paris and had already undertaken many steps to finally straighten out his marriage with Helene since that marriage had to be considered non-existent in the eyes of the law.

Fandor’s heart had been filled with a terrifying concern for several hours at least.

He had been overwrought when, at the St. Petersburg station, just as he jumped into the train with Helene, he realized that Juve was not with them.

Fandor had wondered what misfortune could have arrived, if the policeman was the victim of vengeance or had been delayed by some accident.

Fandor, in fact, could have no idea of what actually had happened.

Nothing would have allowed him to guess that Juve had returned the necklace to the Tsar and that the monarch, furious, had ordered his arrest.

Fandor’s concern, which grew over time, had been abruptly calmed however, by a telegram Juve had sent him from St. Petersburg.

The policeman had used the coded language developed by the two friends, not so much to ensure the secrecy of their communications as to authenticate the sender.

Juve had written: Don’t worry, I’m staying on in Russia for a while but will be back soon.

Feeling calmed by Juve’s message, having completed his urgent errands, having settled Helene in and tasted with her the first days of happiness that they had had in a long time, Jerome Fandor had naturally decided to make a trip down to the newspaper. He wanted to shake his friends’ hands, find out what they had to say for themselves, what was being said in the well-informed circles, in a word, take the time to hear what his friends had to say about Paris.

At the top of the stairs, Jerome Fandor found, sitting behind a black wood table, spotted with ink, the office boy who for the past 20 years had introduced strangers to the writing staff, who wanted to speak with someone from the firm.

“Bonjour Eugene!” Fandor said in a familiar tone.

The other jumped. “Now then,” he exclaimed. “Mr. Fandor! I’m ever so pleased to see you. We were just talking about you the other day. I heard Mr. Mirat say, just like that, that of course you had to be dead since you had shown no signs of life...

“Food for thought,” Fandor commented, smiling.

As Eugene laughed, without understanding, the door to the editorial room suddenly opened and De Panteloupe, the secretary, made an appearance, carrying stacks of papers, angry, as usual.

“Good grief, Eugene! Where are the Havas telegrams? I’ve asked you for them a dozen times.”

Eugene, naturally, remained unconcerned. He was too used to Mr. De Panteloupe’s constants fits of anger and he knew, better than anyone, that they were inconsequential and never resulted in sanctions.

De Panteloupe stopped short.

A cheeky voice had interrupted him, saying, “Calm down old man. Don’t get yourself in such a bother. It will make your hair fall out.”

De Panteloupe, who liked to live it up, was always concerned about going bald. With an automatic gesture, the editor ran his hand over his hair, making sure that his hairline had not suddenly receded.

At the same time, he exclaimed, “Fandor! What are you doing here? So, you’re not dead after all? What a surprise! It’s been such a long time since we’ve had any news of you? Where have you been?”

“From over there,” Fandor replied who, with a vague wave of his hand, seemed to indicate a very distant horizon.

De Panteloupe, however, returned to his usual activity.

“Well good grief,” he said. “Since you're here, we’ll have to open the champagne. This comes at a good time, I was dying of thirst. Get on with you, Eugene. Run over to the bistro downstairs and come back with four bottles... You can put them in my office.”

Then he turned to Fandor, saying, “Will you join me?”

“In a moment,” the journalist replied. “I never turn down a glass of champagne, but first I want to visit my colleagues in the newsroom.”

“Off with you, then!”

De Panteloupe, a busy man, strode across the vestibule, reprimanded a messenger laden with telephones, smiled at Clement, the telegraph man, then quickly kicked open the door to his office and walked in.

Fandor headed toward the newsroom. The large room had not changed. It was still painted white, and decorated with the most fantastic inscriptions provided by the pens of the journalists. It housed a succession of small desks along the walls and in the middle there were two enormous tables where the 40 or so reporters employed by the newspaper worked, under the orders of the various section editors.

Anyone who had walked into this room, without knowing just how free reporters are in their manners, would no doubt have been very surprised by the usual chaos that reigned there. Often, someone could be seen bicycling around the tables, while others roller-skated and some fenced and others exchanged blows, hands wrapped in enormous boxing gloves.

That day, however, as Fandor entered the room, the usual atmosphere was gone. All of the journalists in the room had abandoned their posts and had gathered, jostling, around the small desk that belonged to Chien-Ecrase.1^

Chien-Ecrase, as usual, was bedecked with jewelry that was as flashy as it was fake. He was the editor in chief of the important human interest column.

He was always the one who wrote about what went on in the streets. It was Chien-Ecrase who would write about the pitiful death of that poor woman crushed in the middle of the street, the humorous tale of the drunkard picked up from the middle of the sidewalk just as he thought he was in his bedroom, slipping his boots under his bed, while he was in fact throwing them into a voracious sewer!

Always in a cheerful mood, always smiling, convinced that he was a major man of letters, Chien-Ecrase was the newspaper’s clown.

That was so true that Fandor, as he stepped into the room, and saw the agitation of his colleagues, had no doubt whatsoever as to what was going on.

“Well!" the young man muttered. “That’s it! I'd wager that Chien-Ecrase is once again preparing that formidable bedlam he is so famous for!”

Jerome Fandor shoved his way through the crowd, trying to see what Chien-Ecrase was up to.

Yet, the reporter, sitting at his desk, was excessively grave. He was perfectly serious as he questioned an old woman and noted her answers. She was seated in front of his desk and seemed overcome with rage.

With a wave of his hand, Fandor silenced his colleagues who were about to shake his hand, He listened.

Just then, Chien-Ecrase asked, “How old are you, madam? I have to know your age...Obviously, I realize that my question is indiscrete, but I truly do have to know!”

And, although the old woman had to be at least 60 years-old, Chien-Ecrase added, in a serious tone, “It is true that, at your age, madam, people are no longer shamed to confess to their age! So, how old are you? Fifteen? Sixteen?”

That calmed the woman somewhat.

After hesitating for a second, she replied, “I'm 24 years-old.”

“You don’t look it!” Chien-Ecrase replied. “Are you single? No? Married? I regret that I don’t know your spouse. I would set about wishing you away from him!”

“Oh sir!” the woman protested with a pout.

“I would set about deceiving him,” Chien-Ecrase continued graciously, “I would deceive him if, as I suppose, he has a pretty little mistress...”

Naturally, the woman scowled.

Chien-Ecrase continued,” But, let’s us get to the point of your complaint. Why are you making a complaint, madam?”

This time, the complainant, since that is what she was, stood up suddenly, saying, “Sir, I thought that a newspaper like La Capitale, which is written by quality men such as yourself who are always prepared to defend great causes, would not want to allow the people living in a six-storey house to be molested by government carelessness.”

After that lengthy declaration, the woman huffed and puffed.

Chien-Ecrase made the most of the opportunity to agree, saying “You are right, madam to come to us. We will defend the six-storey house. We will defend it even if it has only five stories, or four or three, two and even one or less!”

The woman caught her breath and said, “Here are the facts. I live at 228 bis Boulevard Haussmann.”

“That’s a nice neighborhood., madam!”

“Yes, sir, it is, and it should be a quiet neighborhood.”

“It should, madam.”

“Well, it isn’t, sir. At least it isn’t anymore and hasn’t been so for a few days. And that is why I am complaining to you.”

“Madam,” Chien-Ecrase said. “Let us get right down to the events that are upsetting you. They’re announcing a flood in the year 2000 and you absolutely must tell me your secret before then!”

At the moment, the brave woman looked at Chien-Ecrase, her eyes filled with concern. She was starting to wonder if people were mocking here Yet, the serious expression on the reporter’s face reassured her.

“Well, sir, here’s what has been going on. Can you believe it? for the last seven or eight days I have been awakened every morning at dawn, by hens.”

“By hens?” the reporter replied, astonished. “Where would one find chickens on Haussmann Boulevard?”

“In the poster column across the street from my place!”

This time Chien-Ecrase jumped. After having properly made fun of his elderly visitor, he was starting to seriously wonder if she was actually the one making fun of him.

Harshly, the reporter asked, “What are you telling me, madam? That there are chickens in one of the Morris columns on Haussmann Boulevard?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Are you absolutely certain?”

“Absolutely.”

“And they sing?”

“Every morning.”

“And how do they sing, madam?”

“Well, like chickens sir... They cluck, cluck, cluck...”

Unfortunately, the perfect imitation the old woman tried to provide inflamed the zeal of the reporters who were present.

For half an hour, they had been enjoying themselves as they listened to Chien-Ecrase interview this visitor who had come in to complain after the installation of a chicken coop inside a Morris column on Haussmann Boulevard.121

General hilarity swept over the room in a storm of cooing and crowing. The 50 or so journalists clucked and chuckled, jumped onto the tables and all spoke out loud.

“Watch out for my egg, there!”

“Go and sit on your chicks.”

The crowing and clucking was so loud it threatened to shake the entire building.

The lady, naturally, could not take any more. Seriously frightened and believing that she had fallen in to the clutches of a band of mad men, she stood up quickly and fled, followed by the crowing of her joyous torturers.

The visitor had barely disappeared when someone in the editorial room, which De Panteloupe had just entered, uttered a battle cry.

“To the windows, for goodness’ sake! To the window! We must give her an ovation!”

The editorial room did, in fact, look out over a courtyard which the unfortunate plaintiff had to cross.

All of the La Capitale reporters gathered at the windows, ready to pursue the poor old woman with their crowing.

“Attention!” ordered Chien-Ecrase. “On the signal, men. One, two, three!"

But no crowing ensured. They all seemed to be paralyzed in bewilderment.

Chien-Ecrase summed the situation up with an extraordinary thought, “Well, well, well, he must really like fresh eggs!”

But what could have surprised the entire staff of La Capitale to such a degree?

The old woman had in fact walked out the door of the newspaper, and she was heading across the courtyard, but she was not alone. Someone had taken her by the arm, someone was listening to her. And that someone was Fandor.

“Madame, are you quite sure about what you’re saying? You regularly hear chickens clucking in the Moriss column opposite your house on Haussmann Boulevard? And it has been going on for four or five days? You’re not mistaken? Not deluded?”

“No, sir, I am not. I’m certain about what I’m saying.”

The old woman had calmed a little. She found Fandor to be a polite, patient listener, respectful of her age. And since that was all she had expected, she thanked him profusely when Fandor tipped his hat and left her a few moments later, after assuring her that he would do everything necessary.

Yet, while the old woman was pleased with Fandor, she was also intrigued.

As always, in the midst of the gaiety, the journalist had listened seriously to the words being uttered before him. He had guessed that the woman addressing Chien-Ecrase was an unusual woman, perhaps a little mad, but he had also understood that she did have some commonsense and that, as a result, there must be an element of truth in what she was saying.

“A chicken in a Moriss column!” Fandor said to himself. “That’s uncommon! Maybe I can cast some light on this matter?”

He had hurried out after the old woman, caught up with her in the stairwell, and he was now determined to find out this adventure could well mean and perhaps even get an amusing article out of it.

Jerome Fandor was one of those men who liked to complete all of the tasks they take on. He immediately jumped into a carriage and headed for Haussmann Boulevard.

There was, in fact, a Moriss column there. Naturally, it was papered with posters and although Fandor walked all around it he did not hear a single chicken cluck.

“Strange!” thought the reporter. “The old woman must have been hallucinating... and yet...”

Then, Fandor had a stroke of genius. He struck the column with all his might, then listened. And, just as he leaned his ear against the column, he clearly heard something moving about inside the structure. Only, he did not hear anything that sounded like a chicken, but rather a groan, a human groan.

A wave of enthusiasm swept over the journalist.

“Good grief! I know what this means! I’ll come back this evening!”

That very evening, at close to midnight, Jerome Fandor returned to the famous Moriss column. At that late hour, since there were no passersby in the street, he would be able to work in peace. As a precaution, he had donned a large white shirt and carried a large metal bucket on his back. Disguised as he was as a poster man, it was completely natural for him to place a ladder against the column, which he planned to climb to the top where he was able to slip his head in under the cap and look down.

It took him no more than a few seconds to reach the top of the ladder and look inside, which was lit by the gas streetlight at the top of the structure. He had not even had the time to look down when he heard a voice from inside the column.

“No... You there, posterman, have you come to disrupt my peace? Well, try not to disturb Josephine. That will make her miss her egg tomorrow!”

Jerome Fandor cried out in surprise,” Good God!”

He felt an overwhelming urge to laugh. A frightful odor of cheese rose up from the column. A resounding crow rang out.

The voice, however continued to mutter, “Well, what’s with you posterman? You’re not going to betray me, are you? I’m not doing anything wrong! I’m quiet. I’m not bothering the government!”

Fandor shouted, “Shut up you animal. You don’t recognize me, Bouzille?”

And at that moment Bouzille, since it was him inside the column, was surprised in turn and said “Well, well, Mr. Fandor. How did you get here? Well, I’m pleased in any case, despite my life in hiding.”

Then Bouzille added, “Come in, come in. Don’t fall on Josephine!”

“Who is Josephine?”

“My chicken!”

With that Bouzille pointed at a superb black hen sitting on a perch made from a stick.

Ten minutes later, Fandor was inside the Moriss column, crouched down on the ground next to Bouzille.

“What are you doing here, Bouzille?” Fandor asked.

“Well, you see, I’m in hiding. Because of a cheese.”

“A cheese, Bouzille?”

“Yes, that’s it,” Bouzille replied, pointing at a superb skull on which he was sitting.

“I don’t understand,” said Fandor.

“Yet, it’s perfectly simply” stated Bouzille. “One evening, I saw these guys that had stolen this cheese. The officers were running after them. Well, there was this ladder leaning against the column and one of these guys climbed up it and dropped the cheese inside. After that, they ran off.”

“And then, Bouzille?”

“Well, then, I climbed in to protect the cheese. Like I said, I’m hiding here like a hermit in order to return this cheese to its owners when they come back. Only, they would do well to hurry up since their cheese is really quite good. And I’ve been eating it.”

Fandor paid no mind to the fact this all seemed quite incomprehensible. Finding Bouzille who had turned into a hermit and was hiding in the Moriss column did not surprise him all that much since Fandor knew, better than anyone perhaps, the unlikely incarnations Bouzille was likely to take on from time to time.

Yet, the young man, amused as he was, continued to question the old tramp.

“And that chicken, Bouzille, what are you doing with it?”

Bouzille, who had been crouching stood up and replied, “Well, this chicken, well, it’s because of my chick.”

“Eh?” said Fandor.

But Bouzille tried to steer the conversation in another direction saying, “Don’t you think we’re fine in here? The gas streetlight provides light for us, heating too, we get all the latest literary news outside. It’s heaven!”

“In fact!" Fandor agreed. “But about that chicken, Bouzille?”

This time Bouzille frowned and replied, “Well, this chicken, I told you, if she’s here, it’s because of my chick.”

Jerome realized that he wouldn’t get any more out of the old man without taking stronger measures.

The journalist looked Bouzille straight in the eyes and, in a severe voice, said, “Bouzille, you don’t want to answer me? Take care! Don’t be stupid. What is with this chicken?”

Bouzille looked very bored and said, “Well, this is my chick’s chicken.”

“Who is your chick?”

Bouzille sighed deeply and replied, “Well, my chick is La Toulouche...”

Then Bouzille looked scandalized as Fandor burst into laughter. The journalist could hardly retain his amusement as he imagined the extraordinary couple that the hilarious Bouzille and the abominable shrew La Toulouche must make.

Yet, Jerome Fandor, noting Bouzille’s bored look, guessed that the man must be hiding something from him.

He insisted, saying, “This chicken belongs to La Toulouche? So why do you have it?”

“Because, Mr. Fandor, because.”

“Because why, Bouzille?”

“Things...!" said the tramp.

Fandor frowned severely and said, “Oh, I see Bouzille. I’m going to have to get angry.”

Bouzille thought about this. Abruptly, he decided to confide in Fandor.

“Mr. Fandor,” he started to say, “That will cost you 40 cents...”

“Here!”

With that Bouzille closed his eyes, as if concentrating on his thoughts, and entrusted Fandor with a strange confidence, saying “All I know, you see, Mr. Fandor, is that La Toulouche came from Rennes where she had spent a few months in the company of this chicken... It seems that she values it more than her life. Seems above all that. She does not want to keep it at her place. So I’m in charge of taking care of it. I know more about this chicken than about my chick!”

Bouzille coughed, and added, “For something else, it will take another 40 cents.”

Fandor felt as if he were involved in some mystery. Naturally, he didn’t hesitate. He paid Bouzille again with another coin.

“Out with it, you wretch!”

But Bouzille swelled up and said, “You don’t have to insult me, Mr. Fandor. Sometimes, I give you good information. Here, let me tell you something that is worth its weight in gold... Look where I’ve put my finger...”

Bouzille placed his ginger on the edge of the column. There was nothing extraordinary there.

Jerome Fandor asked, “Well, Bouzille?”

“Well, Mr. Fandor, outside there’s a poster, a theater poster. Are you following me?”

“Just fine. Get on with it Bouzille.”

“So, the other day, these two guys were talking on and on about this theater. Naturally, I hear everything from inside my column.”

“And, Bouzille?”

“Well, it’s like this, Mr. Fandor, these two guys were going on and on, saying that in this theater, the theater on the poster there, a dreadful catastrophe will take place...”

This time, Bouzille seemed to be serious.

Fandor, despite his calmness, could not keep from shuddering.

What did all this mean? What did it mean?

He asked, “But you didn’t understand right away, Bouzille... They were possibly talking about a play that would fail... You don’t know who they were, the two men who were talking?”

At that moment, Bouzille picked up his black hen and caressed it lovingly.

“Well... yes... no...” he said quietly. “All the same, I think that one was Fantomas and the other, well the other was Le Bedeau!”m



CHAPTER VI - Tragic Error



Fandor, naturally, was overcome with emotion when the extraordinary Bouzille, a hermit in the Moriss column on Haussmann Boulevard, told him, with his peaceful smile, that he had heard Le Bedeau and Fantomas talking about sinister projects, announcing a terrifying catastrophe that was to take place in one of the theaters in Paris.

At that moment, of course, the journalist did not consider the chicken, the first reason for his investigation all that important. Instead, he peppered Bouzille with questions, anxious to learn details that would enable him to determine what the terrifying Fantomas was up to.

Unfortunately Bouzille was unable to add anything at all to the information he had already given Fandor.

The journalist could take out as many large bills as he wanted and wave them under Bouzille’s nose, supposing that they would definitely ensure a certain degree of loquaciousness, but Bouzille remained mute.

His eyes burned with a flame of cupidity, yet he had the honesty to refuse the money he was offered.

“Impossible, Mr. Fandor!" he replied to the offers made by the former La Capitale reporter.

“Impossible to satisfy you this time. Just imagine if I were the most beautiful girl in the world, I could only give you what I have... and all’s fair that’s fair. At this time, I’ve given you everything I know. You can’t ask for more. I know nothing more.”

And knowing himself, Bouzille added with a chuckle, “And if I were you I wouldn’t insist, I’d tell myself, this damned Bouzille is fully capable of making things up, just to take my money!”

Fandor had not felt like laughing since he’d learned that Fantomas was back in Paris and was planning some tragic project. Yet, the picture that Bouzille gave of himself was so likely that he smiled a bit.

“Well!" he agreed. “Thank you, Bouzille. Keep this money in any case. You’re a good guy. Yet, you are going to do something for me. I’m going to leave your home and you will hit the wall to tell me which poster Fantomas was standing in front of when he was speaking with Le Bedeau.”

Bouzille, amazed by Fandor’s generosity, a generosity he had clearly counted on, hurried to agree and the reporter climbed out of the Moriss column.

He was barely outside when he heard Bouzille angrily hit the same column.

Jerome Fandor easily found the place where the tramp was tapping inside the column. There was a large, light blue poster from the Menus-Plaisirs theater pasted there.

“Fine!” Fandor said to himself. “Fantomas is planning an attack on the Menus-Plaisirs.”

And, a few moments later, after saying good night to the hilarious Bouzille, he set off for home. Fandor walked with his head down, worried, nervous, concerned. Fandor knew Bouzille too well not to know that the other man had told him everything he knew. And he did not doubt the truthfulness of his words. If Bouzille said that an attack was being planned, then an attack was really being planned.

What should he do? How could he prevent it? How could he foil the plans of the Master of Fear?

Fandor was all the more concerned since, in an effort to reason calmly, he had to struggle against an emotion that overwhelmed him.

“I can’t do anything,” he declared. “If I warn the police, they’ll just laugh at me. If I warn the management of the Menus-Plaisirs, they’ll think I’m crazy. Of, if only Juve were here!”

But Juve was not there and Fandor had no idea how to prevent the Menus-Plaisirs from becoming the scene of one of those diabolical tragedies the Criminal Mastermind enjoyed so thoroughly.

Jerome Fandor, moreover, despite his dilemma, despite his concern, did not take long to come to a decision.

“Obviously” he declared, “There is nothing I can do officially. Unofficially, however, I will find the means to make myself useful! If Fantomas goes to the Menus-Plaisirs, he’ll find someone to give him a talking to. I’ll be there!”

Fandor was one of those stubborn men who never back away from a fearful project, He was quite resolved to watch every performance given at the Menus-Plaisirs.

Yet, just as he was arriving at this conclusion, Fandor realized that, by attacking Fantomas, he would inevitably cause Helene painful anguish. Most certainly the young woman would fear for her husband when she learned that he was thinking about facing the Uncapturable.

“Good grief! How will I handle this?” Fandor thought. Yet, at the same time, he smiled.

Of course, he had hidden nothing from Helene. He was not one of those men who believed that lying to his wife was not really lying. Moreover, he would never had agreed to do anything without letting her know, since he adored her above all else.

Yet, no matter how deep his adoration went, Jerome Fandor told himself that there were cases when lying was not lying and that if the lie was made with a very specific goal, it was not a bad one.

“I’ll handle things!" Fandor decided. “I won’t say a word to Helene and I’ll tell her everything once my mission has been completed!”

The very next morning, in fact, Fandor started his campaign.

He planned to go to the Menus-Plaisirs himself... He told Helene that he was going to the newspaper to work and suggested that the young women go to the Folies-Francaises, promising that he would try to meet her there at the end of the evening.

Helene did not really like the theater when it meant going alone. Yet, the thought that her husband would be joining her helped her to make up her mind.

“That’s fine!" she agreed. “I’ll wait for you at the Folies-Francaises.”

Yet, that evening, when she arrived at the theater, supervised by the excellent Mr. Thibault, Helene must have been very surprised.

Like everyone else in Paris, she knew full well that the Folies-Francaises was a veritable oasis of solitude on the Boulevard. Generally, there were few passersby and the plays performed there went unnoticed.

Yet, as soon as she arrived, Helene noted that hall was full with a cloud of spectators. Men in suits, women in ball gowns and superb jewelry.

“What’s going on?” thought Helene.

Then she burst into laughter. While walking behind a most elegant woman, who leaned slightly on the arm of a very pretentious gentleman, she learned of an amusing adventure.

Apparently in Box 22, there was a rich heiress to be married off. Notices had been placed in all of the large newspapers. And while the Folies-Francaises was sold out, it was the in-crowd that had come to mock the eccentric individual who had, to some extent, been put up for sale in the daily newspapers.

For her part, Helene had very modestly taken a seat on the lower floor of the hall. She entered the theater, dressed soberly, drawing no attention, discretely taking her seat next to another lady, also dressed soberly. After a glance at the other woman’s face, Helene took an immediate liking to her. Then she most naturally did what everyone else in the theater was also doing. She turned around, looked for Box 22 and burst into laughter. It was completely empty. There was no one there. It looked strange and gloomy in the midst of the large theater where all of the seats had been taken that night, each for a small fortune.

“Well!” said Helene. “It’s either a joke or an ingenious form of advertising. In any case, let’s watch the play!”

At that very moment the curtain rose and the most fantastic melodrama, the most unbearable agglomeration of commonplace tirades that had ever been invented.

“Well,” sighed the young woman. “Is it actually true that the Folies-Francaises is completely incapable of putting on anything that could be considered even slightly good? Or will I have to ward off boredom the entire evening?”

Yet, while Helene was feeling bored, there were other people in the audience who seemed to be wildly amused. First, there was the joyful band of young people who, having come to the Folies-Francaises to catch a glimpse of the heiress in Box 22, quite naturally realized that they had been duped and took it all in stride, laughing.

Finally, and above all, there were a few ladies on their own, quite alone, who, with a good sense for business, had decided that the notice would draw a large number of single men to the Folies-Francaises and that it might, in turn, be interesting to go there as well.

Quite naturally, these women were delighted that Box 22 was empty. They came and went in the theater, making the most of the intermissions to stroll about the corridors or take up a position in the walks, in the lobby, provocative, enticing, bumping the men with their elbows as they walked past, and audaciously staring at the unfortunate gentlemen that seemed likely to be up for a profitable conversation.

One of them, in particular, was truly entertaining with the perseverance which she sought after an admirer. There had already been two intermissions and she had started conversations with very few people. She had barely exchanged pleasantries with a sort of giant when he finally confessed that he was a boxer and was used to all women fighting for his favors.

The elegant woman quietly walked off.

“My dear sir,” she posted with a lack of consideration that immediately revealed her roots, “People do not fight over my favors. I do regret that since it would please me enormously. A boxer or some other type, I don’t care. What I want is someone, someone interesting, this evening...”

Yet, that young person, with her outspoken manners, finally found satisfaction. Her seat was on the lower floor as well, some distance from the central aisle, and the seat next to hers, which had remained unoccupied up to that point, had suddenly been assigned to a large individual, with dark skin, black hair and fingers covered with rings.

The elegant women immediately made her decision.

“He’s a Brazilian. Perhaps even an Argentinian. Those people always have cash. I’ll have to light his fire.”

And, without further ado, she bent over her neighbor’s seat and struck her powdered shoulder against the seductive gentleman’s morning coat.

Brazilian or Argentinian, the large man was obviously easy to move. After only four minutes of such attentions from his neighbor, his face grew flushed and he felt the need to run a handkerchief—so strongly scented with perfume that it could give a migraine to anyone sitting in the vicinity—over his forehead.

“It’s quite...” the Brazilian said softly, starting the conversation. “It’s quite warm, madam.”

“I was about to say the same to you.”

“And yet, I’m used to the heat.”

“You are, sir?”

“I’m from Brazil, Madam.”

The elegant woman chanced a compliment, saying, “I could have guessed as much from your beautiful eyes, sir!”

The large man started to suffocate. Joy stifled him; pride made him dizzy. Obviously he was one of those social upstarts who come to Paris to party and spend the few golden coins they might have while trying to look like millionaires. Her was above all one of those enlightened souls that seem to have been born in Brazil or Argentina to serve as prey for small women in Paris.

“You guessed correctly, madam,” he replied, forgetting all about the play and bending outrageously over his neighbor.

“You have guessed correctly since I am in fact from Rio de Janeiro itself. Moreover, my name is a sure sign of that. I am called Manoel Palatello.”

And with the wild vanity of an ill-mannered child he added, “In Paris, I live on Rue Prony ”

Obviously, the elegant woman decided that his confidence deserved another and she said,” My name is Adele, Adele de Rivoli, and I live on Rue La Bruyere.”

And quite possibly the conversation between the excellent Brazilian with the look of a rasta and Adele de Rivoli, would have continued to be so interesting, so remarkable, if a strange event had not suddenly occurred.

The play being performed on the stage was in fact a military play with ultra-patriotic overtones. It related the truly remarkable accomplishments of a captain who, all on his own, took back Alsace and Lorraine, killing 100,000 Germans and, what was even more prodigious, putting Napoleon I himself back on the throne.

The entire audience, initially overcome with fear when faced with such an inconsistency, grew agitated. They clapped their hands thunderously, they called from box to box, interrupting the dialogue, shouting “Vive la France!” making the candles on the large chandelier shake.

No one was even listening to the performance anymore. What did the grotesque declarations of five or six actors on the stage matter? What did the adventures of the hero who, despite his truly supernatural bravery, wound up being a traitor carried off by 20 soldiers, matter?

And Helene, gentle Helene, who burst into laughter by the stupidity of the plot, was laughing all alone, despite her efforts to remain serious.

Then, suddenly the scene changed. For no reason at all, the actor who had been playing the hero walked over to the steps and turned back to the soldiers who had been surrounding him and ordered, “Shoulder your weapons! Aim! Fire when ordered!”

Then he turned back to the audience and said, “Ladies! Gentlemen! Hands up! Don’t make a move. The first to move will be shot dead!”

And, since the audience did not seem to understand, this extraordinary actor added in an ironic note, “My collectors will pass by...”

And the audience murmured in astonishment. Adele de Rivoli stopped chatting with Manoel Palatello. What was happening?

Following the announcement about the collectors, five individuals with dark expressions, five abominable savages entered the main floor of the theater. They went from row to row, bending over the terrified spectators.

“Come on now, no grumbling.” They ordered. “Your jewelry, chickie. Your wallet, man... and your gold... and your watch!”

In less than an instant, the entire audience was overcome with panic.

Was this serious? Were they dreaming? Were they the victims of some crazy hallucination, a nightmare as stupid as it was extravagant?

The first spectator who was encouraged to give up his belongings by the sinister collectors, tried to rebel.

“But I don’t have anything... I don’t have anything.”

Pointlessly.

The men were armed and, come what may, he had to obey.

At that moment, Helene clenched her jaws, digging her fingernails into the palms of her hands.

“Drat!” the young woman thought. “I understand... I understand...”

Helene recognized the man, the collector who had just come over to her, who no doubt intended to rob her like the others. It was Le Bedeau, Fantomas’ sinister accomplice, the abominable individual who, in this crime, had claimed his share of blood!

At that very moment, Le Bedeau approached Helene’s neighbor.

“Your jewelry!” he ordered. “Be quick about it.”

The young woman resisted, saying, “This is crazy, senseless...”

“Don’t put on airs!” Le Bedeau interrupted her.

Helene saw the savage’s hand brutally tear the heavy diamond earrings from the unfortunate woman’s ear.

“Don’t touch me! Don’t touch me!” shrieked the terrified young woman, her face covered with blood.

Shaking, Helene leaned toward her and whispered, “Shut up! Don’t resist. Fantomas is behind this attack!”

“Fantomas!”

Goodness, Helene could not have any delusions left after this.

The man who was on the stage. The man who was watching the sinister collectors who had just swarmed over the theater at his orders, who were flowing through the aisles and up and down the rows, that man was Fantomas!

And Fantomas was laughing!

The bandit must have been planning this unlikely assault for a long time.

And despite her fear, Helene remained clearheaded, reconstituting the entire drama in a minute.

Fantomas was obviously the author of the fallacious advertisement that had brought the crowd to the usually deserted Folies-Francaises, and Fantomas had brought all of his accomplices to the theater. Using surprise, they had encountered no difficulty controlling the ticket takers or the two guards standing at the top of the stairway. Floor managers and actors must have been locked up and killed during the intermission. After that, Fantomas had free reign and the ten companions that surrounded him, weapons aimed at the audience ensured his impunity.

What should she do? What should she try?

The slightest movement meant certain death. Escape wasn’t even possible. Calling for help was pointless. Who would come? Who could come?

And as Helene was thinking these thoughts, the extraordinary collection continued. Le Bedeau’s men continue to rob the spectators, collecting immense fortunes, valuable jewelry and wallets stuffed with bank notes.

Absolute silence reigned over the audience, which was frozen in fear. Not a sound, not a single exclamation. Nothing but the orders shouted by the wretches.

“Come on now, sissy, get your hand out of your pocket... Are you hiding something, you old... ? Do you want a punch in the face?”

And everyone handed over their valuables.

The scene was horrible, unlikely. The attack surpassed the imagination and yet, it all seemed so easy, lasting barely ten minutes.

For ten minutes, the 3,000 spectators who had rushed to the Folies-Francaises had to live under the threat of the guns aimed at them.

Then, suddenly, a whistle blew.

On the stage, Fantomas gestured with his hand. And something terrible happened. With a single wave of the bandit’s hand, the lights turned out everywhere. The theater, which had been brightly lit just a moment earlier, was plunged into the semi-darkness maintained by the poorly operating emergency lights. And the spectators, more relieved than frightened by the darkness, stood up quickly, shouting curses.

Unfortunately, the poor wretches’ suffering was not over.

A cry, and order, rang out.

“Fire!”

Flashes lit up the room. Detonations rang out.

Then, among the shouts and cries of the injured, the groans of the dying, panic swept over the crowd.

People raced to the exits crushing others on their way. Frightened men punched this way and that to force their way through. Panicked women struggled, moaning inarticulately.

And slowly, slowly while Fantomas and his entire band should have reached safety long ago, the Folies-Francaises emptied and the unfortunate spectators, half mad with fear, ran down the boulevard, sowing panic throughout Paris.

While the panic continued inside the theater and people crushed one another in their efforts to escape, what had happened to Adele de Rivoli?

What had happened to her friendly companion, the gleaming Manoel Palatello?

They had both been visited by Fantomas’ collectors. Yet, their attitude had been quite different.

Manoel Palatello, trembling with fear, had hastily handed his jewelry over to the sinister savages. The Brazilian, who was rather wealthy, was much more eager to suffer a loss, even an important one, than to risk a scrap.

Adele, for her part, had refrained from protesting. She had even, at the time, made an enigmatic comment that might have possibly caught the attention of Manoel Palatello if the poor man had been in any condition to pay attention.

Adele de Rivoli had said, “Here, here, have my trinkets. I don’t care about them, understand. They’re meaningless. I’ll find a way to get them replaced by real jewels.”

What did that mean?

At that moment, Le Bedeau found it quite difficult to keep a serious expression on his face. The extraordinary bandit had, in fact recognized Adele de Rivoli and her words were perfectly clear for him.

Adele de Rivoli was simply Adele, the former mistress of Oeil-de-Boeuf and the Bec-de-Gaz.121 Suddenly overcome with pride, she had left her two lovers to take up her place, as she put it, as a woman of luxury, in the corridors of the music halls.

Adele de Rivoli, as a result of the eventful life she had lived was obviously not a woman to be embarrassed, even in the midst of extraordinary adventures. When the panic started, she found a way to be one of the first out of the theater.

Since she had become of woman of luxury, Adele de Rivoli had also become an excellent business woman and, as she was leaving through an emergency exit, she pulled the fat Manoel de Palatello behind her, holding him by the wrist.

She immediately said to him, “Well, old man, this has been quite the evening. We'll certainly remember it. Just as I’m sitting down to chat with you, they interrupt my work... And now look at you...Bah! Don’t get all upset... You look like a serious man to me... I’ll give you credit!”

That very evening, in fact, Manoel Palatello, who was not yet quite recovered from his emotional turmoil and was even more dumbfounded by Adele as she dragged him forcefully through a series of bars where he drank strong liquor, always on credit, finally arrived at the apartment on Rue La Bruyere where the young woman lived.

Manoel Palatello was very much in love.

“You please me,” he said. “You please me enormously... You’ll be my little woman. Is that what you want, my sweet chick?”

“No! Not my chick. Don't call me your chick!"

“Because!" said Adele de Rivoli.

And since Manoel absolutely wanted to know why she refused to accept this term of endearment, Adele de Rivoli explained, saying “Well, my featherless wonder, it just wouldn’t do... Not that you’re not a good old rooster but even then, there would be two hens in the house and that would be too many. Come and see."

And at that moment, Adele opened a door into a dark room. Immediately a large hen rushed at them, wings spread, beak ready for battle.

“What is that?” Manoel Palatello asked, backing up in fear.

Adele de Rivoli explained, “Oh, don’t get all in a huff. It’s a bird that doesn’t come from France. I have to keep a close eye on it for a friend.”

“What? Who?” asked Manoel.

And she dragged in her new lover, who was starting to wonder if he was dealing with a mad woman.

If Adele de Rivoli, however, had been able to escape from the Folies-Francaises without being injured, the same could not be said for all of the spectators!

At the time of the shoot-out ordered by Fantomas, at the very moment when the bandit was coldly calculating that causing a wild panic was the best way in which to sure his escape, 17 people were shot, more or less seriously.

One of the most pitiful victims was certainly poor Helene. The young woman, of course, had escaped death, but she was most grievously injured. A bullet had struck her shoulder causing a painful injury.

They were carrying her on a stretcher as all of Paris was already buying up special editions relating the catastrophe.

They were carrying her off, injured, and Fandor, his eyes filled with tears and his heart with despair, unable to understand why Fantomas had gone to the Folies-Francaises when he had threatened the Menus-Plaisirs, had been obliged to give consent for her to be taken to a hospital at the other end of Paris.

At this moment the unfortunate young man took his head in both hands and, despite his great courage, sobbed in despair. Was this the truth? Would he never be able to enjoy a few weeks of happiness? Would Fantomas always cross his path?

Yet, Fandor, who had been filled with despair, lifted his head in pride.

“I will get vengeance! I will get vengeance!” he shrieked.

And he no longer wept. His eyes, eyes filled with the flame of desire, were dry.



CHAPTER VII - Disobedience



An hour later, Fandor felt a bit more reassured about Helene’s fate.

He had summoned a doctor who examined the injured woman and waved away Fandor’s concern, saying, “It’s nothing at all, sir. The injury is clean, small and the patient has very little fever and will most likely heal soon and after two weeks of rest will be no more than an unpleasant memory.”

Two weeks of rest! The doctor was talking to his beloved! He felt that two weeks was very short indeed and there was no need to mention it.

Jerome Fandor was not convinced. Deep down, he was still concerned and wondered whether the medical man might perhaps be wrong. What if some unforeseen complications arose, aggravating the situation?

And then, finally, Fandor thought about Helene’s suffering and about the despair the young woman must be feeling, as she lay, motionless, on a chaise longue. She was so active that she could not sit still.

“Two weeks of rest? The journalist grumbled. “That’s fine for him to say. Will we ever be able to rest?”

At that moment, Fandor was on the telephone, asking to be connected to Juve’s home. But, the young man knew full well, unfortunately, that it would not be his friend, it would not be the excellent policeman who would answer at 36-0 North.

When Juve was not in Paris, in fact, old Jean had instructions to sleep in the apartment. He was to answer telephone calls and he was the one Fandor wanted to ask to help care for the young woman.

Jean, in fact, Juve’s quiet servant, the man who was never disturbed, who could never be pulled from his usual calm, felt a great deal of friendship for Helene.

Once before already, he had nursed the young woman and Fandor knew that he would go to marvelous lengths to find ways to distract her, to relieve her suffering as much as possible.

If it had not been for old Jean, Fandor would never have been able to leave Helene’s side, even for a second. Yet, now more than ever, he felt the need to be free, the desire to come and go.

Fantomas’ latest attack, his most recent crime, had been most terrible. Fandor could not accept that it would go unpunished. He could not allow Paris to remain under the thrall of the terror that the tragedy at the Folies-Francaises would indubitably cause. On the contrary, he had to strike Fantomas and his band, hunt him down mercilessly. Fandor felt quite anxious at the thought that he was the only one who could take up the battle, in Juve’s absence.

The elderly servant raced off in response to the young man’s call and, once he arrived, Fandor gave him very specific instructions.

Old Jean was not to leave the side of the injured woman, who was now sleeping the deep sleep of the ill.

He stood there, motionless, attentive, ready to ward off any danger. If need be, he would throw himself into the fire since, in Fandor’s eyes, he was responsible for Helene.

“Off course, sir. I will obey the gentleman! The Master can count on me.”

Jean replied in his quiet voice to the nervous recommendations made by Fandor. He never viewed things as tragic; in any case, he was always able to hide it if they upset him.

Fandor, pleased with the guard he had installed at Helene’s bedside left hastily.

At that very moment, the blood was pounding in the journalist’s veins. He was quite mad with rage and, of course, had no hesitation as to which path he would take.

He hailed a taxi and called out the address, “To the Madeleine! Be quick! There’s A hefty tip in it for you!”

Spurred on by the generous offer, the driver who was chauffeuring our friend Juve, naturally worked miracles. He drove at full tilt, tires squealing, weaving among the passersby as if they were bowling pins, drove over curbs, grazed the gas lamps and scraped the few vehicles he encountered, all to deliver his client to the Place de la Madeleine a few minutes later.

Fandor climbed out of the car, paid the driver, and headed for Haussmann Boulevard.

The entire time of the trip, quite naturally, the flames of the young man’s rage burned ever brighter and he started to swear, words with no meaning, threats. Yet, he fell silent. He strode down Haussmann Boulevard like a mad man, causing the few rare night-time passersby on the aristocratic street, to turn around.

Soon, Fandor reached the Morris column where he had once met Bouzille.

He wasted no time. Fandor started to pound on the column, calling out at the same time, “Bouzille! Bouzille!”

And, at almost the same time, a voice, the voice of the old tramp, answered peacefully, “Well, well, who is making such a nose? I hear you. I’m here but if you keep up this you will wake Josephine.”

That was that. Of course, Fandor paid no attention. He shrieked even louder to the hermit in the column, “Get out here Bouzille! Get out here right now. I need to talk to you!”

Unfortunately, Bouzille was not a man to take matters lightly.

In a grating voice that seemed to come from underground, he replied “What do you mean get out? Do you want me to leave my column to take a stroll at this time of night? No, no, I’m having none of it. I’ve got arthritis and I can’t even stand up.”

“Get out here, Bouzille!” Fandor repeated. “I order you to get out here.”

This time, Bouzille did not respond. The old tramp was a stubborn man. Obviously, he wanted nothing to do with obeying Fandor’s injunctions.

“You can simply climb in,” he finally grumbled, as the journalist continued to insist. “And don’t keep making so much noise or my landlady will scold you. That’s for sure!”

It was obvious that Bouzille was about to refuse to leave his extraordinary home for quite some time. Jerome Fandor, of course, must have had his reasons for not wanting to join Bouzille in his Morris column, as he had that first time.

What was the journalist trying to do?

Then he had a formidable idea.

Abandoning his angry voice and talking in one of well-thought-out decision, Jerome Fandor said, “Bouzille, you don’t want to come out? Too bad for you. I’ll get you out of there anyway. There’s a water hose here and I'm going to spray you in the column. I imagine that will get you out...”

Of course, in fact, there was no water hose near Fandor and he was lying through his teeth because even if there had been a hose nearby he would not have been able to turn it on without attracting the attention of two distant shadows who were melancholically pacing up and down, and those shadows belonged to none other than two city sergeants.

Bouzille, however, was frightened by the young man’s threat.

Bouzille, in fact, knew full well that Fandor was quite capable of the vilest tricks, the craziest deeds. He decided that it was more than likely that he would be turned out by a spray of water and he did not want to run the risk.

Yet he complained, “Truth be told, it’s not very nice what you are saying there, Mr. Fandor. You just can’t be doing things like that. These chickens have sensitive lungs! Come on, come on, don’t get angry... Here I am after all.”

Bouzille, in fact was arduously moving about in the Morris column. Meaningful cracking sounds rose to the surface and even Josephine clucked loudly, disturbed on her perch by the gymnastics Bouzille performed as his head emerged. He had barely glanced out the opening of the Morris column, he had barely seen Fandor, when he suddenly stopped climbing out.

“Oh, but you tricked me!” Bouzille grumbled. “That too, Mr. Fandor, is something you just must not do. It shows a lack of respect for a man of my age... to a man with a white beard... Good grief! You’ll burn in hell for three more days, at least.”

And Bouzille added in a furious voice, “Why did you mention a water hose since there is none? My word, I almost feel like climbing back down inside.”

Bouzille, who was holding on to the edge of the Morris column as if leaning against a balcony railing, pretended to head back down.

Fandor stopped him.

“Stop joking! I have to talk to you.”

“It will cost you!” Bouzille replied seriously.

But Fandor was in no mood for joking.

“Which poster did you show me?” he asked.

“Show me where it was. Here?”

Fandor was pointing his finger, touching the poster of the Menus-Plaisirs, of the theater where he had been and where nothing had happened. Whereas Fantomas had gone that very evening to the Folies-Francaises, where he had launched a most formidable attack.

Bouzille responded without hesitating to Fandor’s question, “That one there!”

And the tramp was most surprised by the effect his words produced.

Increasingly nervous, Fandor was no longer joking at all.

“You’re lying!” the young man screamed. “Nothing happened at that theater. As a result, that’s not the theater Fantomas should have been talking about when you overheard him. You’re lying to me Bouzille! Or you’re deliberately trying to deceive me and, in that case, you will pay for it. Or perhaps, you were just playing with me and, in that case as well, you’ll never go to heaven.”

Obviously, Fandor was sincere. He clearly thought that Bouzille, with his usual recklessness, had given him false information. Yet he wanted to know, beyond any possible doubt, because he was filled with remorse at the thought that he had gone to the Menus-Plaisirs where nothing was supposed to happen while he had sent Helene to the Folies-Francaises where she had had the most unfortunate experience.

Bouzille, however was struggling like a maniac at the top of his Morris column.

“What are you saying, Mr. Fandor?” he protested. “Are you saying that I lied? Well you’re not being nice at all today! First of all, lie is not a nice word at all. I’m calling you out on that.”

Then Bouzille, set outside his outraged sensitivities and in a completely neutral voice said, “First, I don’t understand. If you’re in such a snit because of the poster, well that’s not my fault. It was the one you showed me that Fantomas was pointing at. If it indicates the Menus-Plaisirs then something was supposed to go down at the Menus-Plaisirs. But, there’s always the chance that he changed his mind.”

Jerome Fandor shrugged.

Bouzille’s hypothesis was, in fact, completely unacceptable. Fantomas was not a man who changed his mind. Fantomas never spoke lightly. Once he had decided to do something, he always did it. He was master of everyone and everything. He said so himself and there was no obstacle that could sway him once he had made up his mind.

“Bouzille, you’re lying to me!” Fandor repeated. Yet, at that moment, there was a great uproar. Bouzille, in a burst of indignation, had wanted to pound on his chest to affirm his perfect sincerity.

Unfortunately, Bouzille was balanced precariously at the top of the Morris column. Suddenly, he lost his footing and tumbled back inside the column, creating an even more extraordinary racket when his extraordinary hen, Josephine, roused abruptly from her sleep, started to cluck desperately and beat her wings.

“Bouzille! Bouzille!” Fandor ordered. “Come back here this second!”

But, inside the monument, Bouzille rubbed his sides cautiously.

“Never again... I’ll never start that up again. No, no! You make me catch cold, you insult me... and I don’t care for that at all. Not at all. What have I got to do, Mr. Fandor, with your adventures? I give you information and you’re still not happy. Then you make a racket at my door! What kind of manners is that? I live a quiet life and I don’t want any nonsense. If I became a hermit it’s because I want to be left alone. So, it’s time to go to bed. You take care of your chickens and I’ll take care of mine.”

Bouzille, who was a chatty type, could have gone on for some time, shouting at Fandor in this manner, half furious, half mocking, when he suddenly heard a loud shout.

It was just Fandor, who was starting in again, swearing like a soldier.

“In the name of God! In the name of God!”

“Quiet!” shouted Bouzille. “What’s up with you?”

But Fandor was no longer listening to the old tramp’s questions.

“I’m so stupid! What’s happened to me is so stupid! It’s true, Bouzille wasn’t lying. It was right here on the column that Fantomas was looking when he announced his abominable intention. But someone changed the posters! The other day, when I saw the Menus-Plaisirs poster, I never thought that it had been posted on top of one for the Folies-Francaises!”

As Fandor was talking to himself, furious, he was interrupted by Bouzille who, curiosity gnawing at him, had to started to climb back up and once again emerged at the top of the column.

“Mr. Fandor for all the time I’ve given you, I truly do deserve a drink.”

But Bouzille was definitely playing with misfortune.

In order to attract Fandor’s attention, he wriggled about like a mad man and fell a second time. Fandor, who was leaving, heard abominable shrieking. It was the chicken that Bouzille must have hit on his way down. She was clucking desperately and Bouzille was trying to calm her.

“Now, now,” he said. “Don’t go on about things like that, Josephine. It’s not like I broke your eggs. You have to be gentle. Am I complaining? And yet, my giblets are bleeding...”

Then Bouzille called out, “Mr. Fandor! Mr. Fandor, you owe me!”

But Fandor was long gone.

That very night, when such tragic events took place, mingled with such comical adventures, that very night when Helene was injured at the Folies-Francaises, when Fandor was investigating the Morris column in which Bouzille was struggling with his hen, Josephine, other adventures took place, events that demonstrated the extraordinary will of the one who, once again, had spread fear throughout Paris.

Once the horrible attack on the theater had been completed, Fantomas’ companions had, naturally, rushed off on their separate ways.

The master’s orders were quite clear.

“Everyone go home!” the Criminal Mastermind had shrieked. “You’ll all be paid tomorrow”

Naturally, they had hastened to follow his instructions, since Le Bedeau, Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de Boeuf could never have resisted the Criminal Genius.

Fantomas had jumped into an automobile and hastily disappeared, taking with him the incredible loot his men had just given him.

While some of accomplices disappeared, racing away, slinking along walls, disappearing in Paris, where the news of the formidable crime had barely had time to spread, Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf, the cheerful idiots that they were, naturally head off to Les Halles, where they planned to have a drink before going home to bed.

Le Bedeau, who was much more audacious and, no doubt, also better informed, did not rush in the least.

Taking large strides, without rushing, he walked down the boulevard, both hands in his pockets, strolling with that sinuous pace of someone up to no good.

Le Bedeau went home. At that time, he was living in the infamous Tivoli alley, next to the Saint-Lazare station. He went home, as he said, with his mind at peace, like a good worker who had just completed his day and was in no rush to enter his miserable abode.

Yet, that evening, Le Bedeau was sad.

His sadness came from the jealousy that washed over his mind.

“In any case!" he thought. “It’s disgusting. It’s always the same ones who have butter on their plates and the same ones who eat dirt! Right now, Fantomas has us working like dogs. Pick up everything he says. Do this... Do that... But I’ll pocket what I want and you’ll have what’s left!”

A few seconds later, Le Bedeau swore, “Good grief. I’m fed up!”

Le Bedeau had, in fact, just played a major role in the attack so successfully undertaken by Fantomas at the Folies-Francaises.

First, he had hired the men who, at Fantomas’ sides, had controlled the theatre with their weapons. Then he had supervised the thieves and he figured that this double role earned him a large part of the proceeds.

Thinking about Fantomas, Le Bedeau said, “I wonder what kind of booty he picked up. My hat was filled with diamonds and all kinds of luxurious trinkets! And then there were those blue bank notes. I stuffed my pockets. And isn’t that a pity. That Fantomas could have slipped me a few tonight!”

All in all, Le Bedeau was experiencing the feelings normally felt by all those who serve as accomplices for criminals. Those who, even before the loot is divided up, find their share too small.

Le Bedeau, nevertheless, knew full well, that there was no point rebelling and clamoring for more.

Fantomas was not a man who could be moved by fear, not one who could be touched.

People had to accept his decisions with no hope of being able to change them at all. He was jealous, above all, of his authority and did not tolerate contradictions or advice. You either obeyed him or got out!

“Fine, fine,” grumbled Le Bedeau. “We all obey. But, still... his day will come.”

Le Bedeau, at that moment, had just walked into the abominable hotel where he lived. He had walked up a frightfully filthy staircase and, tiptoed down a stinking corridor, heading for the small door that opened into his room.

“Well, here I am. Let’s go in and take a look,” he said.

He pulled his key out of his pocket and placed it in the lock.

He walked into the room.

Just then, in the darkness, there was a rustling, a sliding, an imperceptible yet clear sound.

Le Bedeau was immediately overcome with rage.

“In the name of God!” he cursed. “It’s starting all over again. Don’t I get to sleep tonight?

Standing motionless in the dark room, Le Bedeau swore, “Well I’m fed up! I’m terribly fed up!”

But, in the dark, the noise continued...

Just then, Le Bedeau took off his coat. He grasped it by one sleeve and threw it, with all his strength, toward the corner of the room.

“Shut up, chicken!”

But, who was he talking to?

The jacket, its pockets stuffed with heavy objects, struck the wall noisily. A cry rang out, a strong cry, a clucking.

“I’d cheerfully wring the necks of all such beasts!”

And he kicked out at the dark.

Then he continued to undress.

He unrolled the red belt that held up his pants.

Suddenly he stopped, saying, “I’m hungry. Work kills you.”

He seemed to hesitate. Then, in a low voice, he muttered, “Well, the guy told me to keep them. What’s with this now? I’m to be a peasant now? I have to keep care of his animals? Goodbye, sir!”

Le Bedeau sat down on his bed. He had taken off his boots and was banging his heels on the tiled floor.

“I’m hungry!” he repeated.

Then he stood up suddenly, shouting, “And when you’re hungry you eat! Good grief! I’ve got food tonight...”

Le Bedeau chortled sinisterly. He stood up, took a box of matches out of his pocket. And struck one of the wooden sticks.

“Where’s my candle. Here it is.”

Then he called out, “Where are you, you filthy beast?”

And something extraordinary happened.

At the other end of the room, in a corner, prepared or so Le Bedeau thought, to fight off any attack, there was a chicken, a black chicken, identical to those that Adele de Rivoli and the excellent Bouzille had.

What was the animal doing in this dump?

Who could have entrusted it to Le Bedeau’s care?

Why was the wretch sharing his room, which looked like a den, with this animal that could be of no use to him!

Le Bedeau looked at the creature fiercely. He laughed, as if something funny had just occurred to him.

“Chickens,” he muttered. “Chickens, don't you play with me. Some I’ll hit and the others I’ll eat!”

Then he added, “I’m going to eat you little one.” He took three steps, then jumped on a terrified chicken that had no time to escape. He wrung its neck in a few minutes.

Le Bedeau, moreover, seemed to be enjoying himself quite a bit. He watched the final convulsions of the poor creature as it writhed on the floor.

“That’s it, then. Die, little friend...It doesn’t matter that I’ve been given orders to take care of you... I don’t care about any orders! That’s just how I am. Plus, I’m fed up!”

Le Bedeau was a stubborn brute.

Soon, he picked up the chicken, which was not quite dead yet and started to pluck its feathers without realizing how horribly cruel the act was.

“I’ll eat you,” he repeated.

Then laughing cynically, he pulled out the feathers by handfuls, throwing them on the floor of his dump.

Le Bedeau had plucked three-quarters of the poor chicken when, suddenly, he stood up.

“In the name of God!”

He had grown very pale.

Abruptly he threw the chicken on his bed. Then he ran to the door and placed his ear against it.

“Good lord, those are his footsteps...”

He could, in fact, hear the quite steps of a man approaching in the corridor.

Le Bedeau threw himself back. He was white as a sheet, his face was covered with sweat. He clenched his fists as if he were about to throw himself forwards.

The steps, however, continued to approach.

Le Bedeau quivered all over.

After a few moments, he could no longer hear any sounds. The man who had been coming had stopped and must certainly be on the other side of the door.

Le Bedeau listened, panting. And it was all very simple. A key turning in the lock, a door grating as it opened.

Le Bedeau backed up against the wall.

“Good evening,” a deep voice said.

“Good evening,” Le Bedeau repeated in a wild voice.

The man stepped into the room, closing the door carefully behind him, and walked into the middle of the room.

“Well,” he said, “What are you up to?”

“Nothing!" said Le Bedeau. “What do you want?”

And Le Bedeau looked at his visitor, eyes filled with hatred and fear.

The man glanced quickly around the room.

No gesture betrayed his thoughts. He seemed impassive. The candle, placed on the tiled floor, did not light up his face. It was impossible to see more than his silhouette, tall, large, supple, trim.

Suddenly, the man turned around. He took a step toward Le Bedeau, standing close to the miserable, panting wretch.

And slowly, in a voice that bode no good, he asked, “Le Bedeau, where is my chicken.”

Le Bedeau’s teeth chattered.

“I... I don’t know!" he said.

And the man bent down. He picked up a handful of black feathers from the floor, waving in the current of air.

“You don’t know?” he asked. “You’re lying! Where do these feathers come from?

Le Bedeau did not answer.

Quietly the man placed his hand on Le Bedeau’s shoulder, and grabbed him by his collar.

“Le Bedeau, answer me. Where is my chicken?”

And since Le Bedeau continued to say nothing, he insisted, “I told you to be careful, to keep her for me at any cost, to treat her as the apple of your eye. This was a mission of confidence that I gave you. Now, tell me, where is my chicken?”

Le Bedeau remained stubbornly silent.

The man, almost immobile, seemed to shiver.

“Le Bedeau,” he continued in a lower voice, “You disappoint. How can you, an old colleague, a man I’ve known for 20 years, how can you have betrayed me like this? Do you know what this behavior deserves?”

At that very moment, Le Bedeau seemed to shake and quiver, as if run through by an electrical current.

“Mercy! Mercy!” he murmured. “Forgive me Fantomas!”

But the man standing before him, Fantomas, since it was Fantomas, smiled as he heard those words.

“I don’t understand you!" he replied. “I never show mercy. What’s the point? Pity is a sign of weakness. Le Bedeau, you are going to die...”

A moan, an inarticulate groan, rose up from the thief’s throat. It was indistinct, incomprehensible, a supreme invocation for pity.

Fantomas continued to laugh.

And it was a frightful thing. Le Bedeau seemed to sag at the knees. It was if he were making an immense effort to get free from the grasp that held him. Pointless. Fantomas did not even move. His hand, resting on Le Bedeau’s shoulder had simply shifted over to the miserable wretch’s neck. Agile fingers, strong fingers, muscled fingers, dug into Le Bedeau’s flesh.

The thief did not cry out; his death rattle was smothered in his throat.

And while Fantomas seemed to be making no effort at all, using one hand, slowly, knowingly, as if trying to make the pleasure last, Fantomas strangled the man who had disobeyed him!

There came a time when Le Bedeau’s body was a soft, limp thing, a horrible, disgusting wreck, face violet and eyes rolled back, nothing more than an ignoble mask of horror.

Then, Fantomas, still laughing, released his grip.

The strangled man’s body fell heavily to the floor.

Fantomas pushed it with his foot, shrugging, amused.

“Definitely,” he said to himself, “I’m finding it most difficult to retain my accomplices! Sooner or later, they always turn bad. What imbeciles!”

But Fantomas was not a man to take pity on a cadaver for long.

He seemed to completely forget the crime he had just committed. He had no more time for the man who had served him for so long, the man he had so pitilessly eliminated, at the first sign of disobedience.

No, Fantomas simply said, “What the hell did he do with that chicken? Could he have eaten it, by chance?”

But, then he thought to bend down.

Under the bed, Fantomas saw the bird’s body and he picked it up with a satisfied smile.

“I got here just in time!” the bandit concluded. “I certainly haven’t wasted my night!”

Fantomas quietly wrapped the bird in a newspaper and slipped it under his arm. He put out the candle, left the room, stepping over Le Bedeau’s cadaver, closed the door then went on his way, a black shadow, slipping through the night, which passersby skimmed past without recognizing, and whose name, however, was displayed on the special editions, screamed out by newspaper boys, the name of horror, the name of blood, the name which, once again, had just sent a frightful shiver of terror around the entire world!



CHAPTER VIII - New Horror



“Speech... sandwiches... magazine... music... drumroll... decoration... another speech and another decoration... decidedly, I’ve got a lot on my shoulders!”

The man who was carrying on like this, talking to himself, was none other than Juve and Juve was expressing his innermost thoughts all the more sincerely since he was talking to himself, and no one was there to laugh at his bad mood, to tease him about the way in which he summed up his most recent accomplishments.

It was just as well that Juve, as he said so himself, believed that he had largely finished with the stupidly feverish existence that he had been living for four days.

Juve, in fact, had just come from taking part in the official procession, accompanying the Tsar of all the Russias, and the Tsarita, who had come to France for the most official of trips.

The policeman had embarked on the imperial yacht, had accompanied it to Dunkirk, had attended the naval review, suffered through an official reception at the City, endured the special train that took the sovereigns to the station at the port of Dauphine. Now, off to the side, he was considering the comings and goings of the official personalities that were responsible for talking the

Tsar and the Tsarita in the carriages surrounded by an escort of cavalrymen that would ride to the Palais d’Orsay.

Juve was not a man who enjoyed protocol. Quite the contrary. He had deep disdain for all official ceremonies and that fully explained why, at this moment, swaying between duty and pleasure, Juve was wondering if he would continue to accompany the sovereign or if he would simply sneak out, get lost in the enthusiastic crowd and forget, for a moment, that he had just been given the honor of being included in the immediate entourage of His Majesty, Emperor Nicolas II.

Juve, in fact, had been unable to leave the sovereign since his mysterious adventures in Russia.

After sending the dispatches organized by surveillance, which had produced no results, to the border station, Juve had quite naturally manifested the desire to leave.

Yet, the Tsar wanted to hear nothing about that.

While he still claimed, out of vanity, that he could not trust Juve, he had, in fact, the most absolute confidence in the policeman’s intelligence. Under the circumstances, Tsar Nicolas had, to a certain extent, sequestered Juve and ordered him, almost threatened him, to accompany him and the Tsarita on their official trip to Paris.

“Since we’re going!" said the Tsar!" Then you will come with us. And if it is true that Fantomas is in Paris, well then we’ll find the famous necklace that the wretch stole from us in Paris and we can get it back on our way.”

Juve had to give in, but he did so with poor grace.

And now, precisely when the procession was getting organized in Avenue du Bois, Juve said to himself, “The Tsar made me promise to accompany him to Paris, but no farther than that... So here we are in Paris, inside the fortifications. So, I’m free. I’m going to get out of

here and quickly at that!”

Juve was, in fact, walking away, when he saw Mr. Havard in the first row of the stewards.

The Head of the Surete was anxious, nervous, worried.

Every time sovereigns visited, moreover, he experienced numerous difficulties. On these occasions, he never relaxed for a second, fearing an attack, a scandal, an unfortunate demonstration, some of those incidents that are impossible to prevent, although people call the police useless when they unfortunately occur.

Juve walked over to Mr. Havard.

“Good day! How are you?”

Mr. Havard jumped and replied, “Ah! Juve! Where did you come from? We had no news whatsoever about you. Did you come back with the Tsar by any chance?”

“Yes”

“You’re not joking?”

“Not in the least.”

Mr. Havard was dumbfounded.

He knew Juve too well, however, to continue to be surprised about something he considered an adventure. And he would never admit that he was astonished. Good grief! Juve was a man of the strangest and oddest incarnations! He was with the Tsar. Fine! Mr. Havard nodded his head, indicating simply that he had no intention of trying to understand the reason for that fact.

And with that, still just as furious and still unable to back down, Mr. Havard grumbled, “So, you're with the Tsar! Well, you could have just as well have told him to stay at home. France is a Republic and not a country where we cheer on kings and emperors! Those wretches never give us a minute’s peace!”

Then Mr. Havard jumped on another idea.

“What about Fantomas?” he asked.

Juve’s face turned red.

A dark expression of fury passed over his features.

“Fantomas,” stammered Juve. “Well, I haven’t caught him yet, but I will! The fight between us drawing closer and closer. Moreover, I’ve always told you, Mr. Havard, that it will be him or me. It’s a fight to the death for us!”

Mr. Havard nodded his head silently and did not reply immediately.

In the past, he had allowed himself to tease Juve, and joke about his misfortunes, his difficult investigations. Now, on the other hand, he grew serious, not joking at all, having finally come to the realization, despite his narrow mind, of the tragic side of battle Juve had been waging for so many years, risking his life each time, to release the world from a man who terrorized it.

Mr. Havard said, “Are you aware of his latest attack? Have you read about his mad attack on the

Folies-Francaises?”

“Yes,” replied Juve, clenching his fists. “I’m aware of it. The newspapers I read on my way from Dunkirk provided the information. Yet, there are details I’d like to discuss with you.”

“At your service,” said Mr. Havard.

But the Head of the Surete bit back his words immediately.

“Rather, I’m not. We can’t discuss that here. Somewhere else. The procession is about to set off and I insist on accompanying it. Would you like to meet me at my office in two hours, Juve?”

“Of course, chief.”

“I’ll see you then.”

The two men went their separate ways and Juve jumped into a carriage, calling out the address for his personal home.

“Rue Tardieu, driver. No. 1. You don’t know where that is? Of course! Place Saint-Pierre... You don’t know that either? The place where you catch the funicular for Sacre-coeur... Now you see? Fine.”

Juve sat back on the cushions, savoring the joy of being alone, of no longer having to take part in the insipid conversation of the upper class trying to be likable, of being able to smoke one of the wonderful French cigarettes which he had missed for such a long time.

“It’s going to be so nice to go home. Old Jean will jump out of his skin when he sees me. I can bet on that. As always, he will be occupied waxing the floor in the dining room. What a rare pearl he is! I can arrive at any time and he will always be there, and always in a good mood!”

Juve congratulated himself as he was making these relative suppositions about old Jean’s occupations as he entered his apartment.

Juve, in fact, did not have his key with him and had rung the bell at the door to his home. No one answered.

He tried pounding on the door with his fist, but that produced no better results.

“What does this mean?” Juve wondered.

Obviously, Juve had absolutely no idea that Old Jean had been requisitioned by Fandor to care for Helene. He was so very far from that supposition that he hesitated for a long time before deciding what to do.

“Good grief,” Juve said to himself. “What am I to do? Yet I wanted to go home.”

Then he burst out laughing and said, “To think that if I were standing in front of any other apartment, I wouldn’t hesitate a minute .... I’d just put my shoulder to it and break the door down! Yet, here I am, at my own home and like any brave member of the bourgeoisie, I’m concerned about the vindictive complaints of my excellent landlord!”

Once again, Juve started knocking, ringing, making an incredible din.

Suddenly, he headed back down the stairs.

“I’m such an idiot,” he thought. “Jean is a simple man. He wasn't expecting me to come back. I’m willing to bet that he stepped out, that he went to cheer on the Tsar and the Tsarita and their procession.”

Pretending to be angry, Juve added, “For example, he won’t be carried into paradise. I’ll put him out. That would be the 530th time, if I’m not mistaken.”

After walking down five floors, Juve called a carriage.

“To the Surete!” he ordered.

Thirty minutes later, the policeman found himself in the office of Mr. Havard, who had just raced in, overwhelmed.

“What a filthy job!” Mr. Havard murmured, hanging up his hat and throwing his gloves on the fireplace mantle. “What a filthy job! And the Tsar is demanding his necklace right away... The police prefect sent me a note. His necklace! What necklace? And what’s his necklace to me?”

As Mr. Havard was grumbling, Juve couldn’t help but smile.

“Oh that,” he murmured. “But you don’t seem too caught up with the most recent events, Mr. Havard. Didn’t Fandor tell you?”

“No,” Mr. Havard said, abruptly. “Fandor is with his wife. He has his hands full with her. I barely spoke with him..."

Juve stood up at that moment, smiling.

“Excuse me, but I have a question, Mr. Havard. Do you have the hens?”

As he heard those words, Mr. Havard stared at Juve, eyes round, mouth open, completely bewildered.

“The hens?” he repeated. “What hens are you talking about? What is all this about hens?”

And Mr. Havard, who was not a patient man, pounded on his desk, enraged.

“It’s unheard of!” he declared. “It’s as if people are always playing charades here... And now Juve, who’s just come back from Russia, is talking to me about hens... How am I supposed to understand anything?”

“Everyone is talking about hens in Paris. There’s that complaint lodged by Mr. Janvial, the manager of the Jardin d’acclimatation, who says that someone stole hens... in Russia for that matter, at the border train station... I even thought that it might have had something to do with your Fantomas... And, another thing, there’s a police report stating that there are hens on Haussmann Boulevard... People can hear them clucking. Nonsense. And, even better, I received a complaint from a woman who lives on rue de Prony, who claims that a certain Manoel Palatello is raising chickens in his apartment! It’s enough to drive one mad! And now Juve asks me if I have the hens. What hens? I don’t know. White hens, black hens! Out with it man.”

Juve stood up suddenly.

“Mr. Havard, he said, in that quiet voice which was ordinary for him. “Everything will be explained in the simplest way possible. The matter of the necklace, and the story about the hens, they’re related. Moreover...”

“You’re mad, Juve,” Mr. Havard interrupted.

“No I’m not. Why?”

“What are you trying to tell me, that the Tsar’s necklace and the chickens on Haussmann Boulevard are connected?”

“Obviously!" Juve declared. “And it all points back to Fantomas. Fantomas!”

But Mr. Havard felt madness overtaking him. This precise, clear, categorical man, could not accept that he did not immediately understand what someone was saying to him.

“Explain yourself,” he said, sounding wounded. “I hate puzzles. Tell me about the chickens... What do they have to do with Fantomas?”

“Mr. Havard...” Juve started to say.

But it was unlikely that Mr. Havard would obtain the explanation he wanted quickly. In fact, just as Juve was about to provide an explanation, the telephone started to ring.

Naturally, the chief of police picked up the handset and shouted “Hello!” into the device.

Mr. Havard’s correspondent had barely uttered a few words before the head of the police department suddenly stood up. Holding the telephone to his ear, Mr. Havard grew strangely pale.

“Oh! Good grief! Good grief!” he said.

And suddenly, he dropped the device and collapsed back into his chair.

“Juve! Juve!” he panted. “It’s horrible! It’s abominable! In full daylight! In the heart of Paris. Fantomas!”

Juve grew nervous in turn.

That morning, Jerome Fandor woke in a cheerful mood. He had received excellent news about Helene, who was convalescing normally and who, most certainly, would soon be able to get up with nothing more than a bad memory of the tragic evening at the Folies-Francaises.

And Jerome Fandor had another reason to be satisfied. In fact, two months earlier, he had written to the management of one of the largest amusement parks which, in keeping with the fashion in America, had grown popular in Paris, to request information about a scenery trick that he was particularly interested in. And, in his mail, Jerome Fandor discovered a letter from the managers of the Feeric City, asking him to go and see them that afternoon, about an interesting business matter.

“I don’t know what these people want from me,” Jerome Fandor said to himself, “But I’ll go and see them. I think all these large amusement parks are stupid, but I do admit they seem to please the common people. Who knows? Perhaps they’ll ask me to do something interesting, since I don’t presume they want to discuss the information I asked them for, so long ago.”

Jerome Fandor, to be truthful, had not revealed his personal hope. In actual fact, given his prodigious activities, his fertile imagination, he had created a rather entertaining invention and he hoped to be able to sell the secret to the management of Feeric City.

At three o’clock that afternoon, Jerome Fandor arrived at the large amusement park and, since he was early, he started to stroll through the crowd that filled the circular alley ways.

One by one, Jerome Fandor visited the dizzying roller coaster, where pretty women enjoyed themselves screaming in terror, the toboggans, where visitors came out covered with bruises, the rotating plates when people ran the risk of sprained ankles, the strange animals that smelled incredibly bad, the swings that creaked in lamentation, namely all of the dangerous attractions that provided the show at Feeric city.

“All those machines are so stupid!" Fandor said to himself.

But he continued on his way, laughing at the enthusiasm of the crowd that had paid the admission fee and continued to pay for each attraction, in order to earn the right to be maimed, to vomit or to tear their clothing.

Strolling about like that, Jerome Fandor suddenly saw the crowd in the large park flow toward the heart of Feeric city. There was some sort of arena there, a large circus tent which they piled into.

“Fine!’’ Fandor said. “What else have they come up with! A canon that will shatter our eardrums?

A powder that will make us sneeze? Or a shower of icy water that will give us pneumonia?”

But, both and idle onlooker and a Parisian, Fandor could well complain about the American nature of the spectacle, he still followed the crowd and took his place in the circus tent.

He immediately realized what was about to happen.

An immense circular net had been installed at the top of the tent and above that net, swung flying trapezes, smooth ropes and rings.

“Perfect!” he said. “A change in program. Now they’re going to show us the acrobats!”

And Jerome Fandor was impressed with the fact that they had taken pains to install the net, in order to avoid accidents.

“This changes everything!" he decided. “When the spectators are running the show, they’re allowed to kill themselves. But when it’s the performers, they put up a net!”

Jerome Fandor, however, was wrong to grumble. A few minutes later, when the tent was filled with people, a troupe of acrobats made their appearance and climbed up the ropes.

For a few minutes, the performance was marvelous, enthusiastic.

The Feeric City troupe performed miracles. The men were consummate gymnasts. They seemed to push back the limits of the possible, flying through the air, and the vision of the supple bodies swinging from one ring to another, flying from the trapeze to a fixed bar, catching one another by the ankles, sliding dizzyingly along smooth ropes and, like elastic balls, bouncing back onto the highest structures, was incomparable.

The crowd went wild, clapping their hands, shrieking in delight.

Carried away, even Fandor, stood up.

“Bravo! Bravo!” he shouted.

But, suddenly, he cried out, he cried out in horror, “Oh God! Oh God!”

Then he cried out again, “Be careful. Every man for himself! Every man for himself!”

What had Fandor seen?

What led him to cry out in panic?

The journalist had just seen a frightening vision!

Suddenly, at the back of the tent, an acrobat had arrived. He was dressed, or rather draped, in an enormous cape, with the hood pulled down over his face, hiding him completely. No doubt, this acrobat was the star of the troupe, since a sensational entrance had been reserved for him.

He was standing, on a plank, which four men carried on their shoulders, much like an old-fashioned warrior, being honored.

The man, as motionless as a statue, soon reached a hole in the net that floated over the crowd, through the acrobats climbed up to the wooden platform.

A rope, ending in a loop, had been lowered. He placed one foot through it and slowly the rope rose to the rafters.

Jerome Fandor had, quite naturally, followed the arrival of this acrobat, along with the other spectators. He expected some feat even more surprising that those that had already been presented, some wonder that surpassed the marvels already performed.

Jerome Fandor was not, however, expecting what he was about to see.

Once he reached the topic of the wooden structure, the man had quietly taken up his position on a sort of small platform, remaining motionless for a moment. Then, just as all eyes focused on him, just as he was the center of everyone’s attention, he suddenly slipped one arm out of the sleeves of the robe, brought a silver whistle to his lips and blew it loudly.

Immediately, the other acrobats stopped what they were doing. The spectators, panting, froze in admiring anxiety. The minutes seemed endless. The man did not move.

Jerome Fandor felt distinctly uncomfortable. He shrieked.

The man had, in fact, removed his robe and was immediately recognizable.

He was tall and slim, with a beautiful silhouette. But, unfortunately, that silhouette was so very tragic. Simply seeing it made the most intrepid, the most courageous of men shiver...

The man was dressed entirely in black. He wore a black, figure-hugging outfit that covered him from head to foot. His hands were hidden in black gloves; his face was covered by a black mask and his hair by a black hood.

Horrific silhouette, frightening silhouette, cursed silhouette!

After glancing at the man for no more than a second, Jerome Fandor screamed, “Every man for himself!”

Of course he recognized that silhouette. Of course, he could identify it! There was no doubt at all about the man dressed fantastically in black, who crossed his arms scornfully, starting down at the crowd that pressed forward below his feet, separated from him by the large net suspended over the spectators.

“Fantomas! It’s Fantomas!”

With all might, Jerome Fandor screamed the horrible name, the horrific name, the name of blood, the name of death...

“Fantomas! Fantomas!”

It was the Criminal Mastermind, the Frightful Torturer, the Master of Fear who stood above the crows, smiling, amused.

But what was he going to do? What was his infernal plan? What was his audacious project?

“Every man for himself! Fantomas! It’s Fantomas!”

Jerome Fandor had barely uttered those tragic words, which resounded like a death knell, when terror swept over the entire audience.

Faces turned pale. Mouths grimaced. Inhuman, inarticulate cries and groans rose.

The spectators had all stood up. They shoved and pushed in the narrow aisles that separated the seats. They wanted to escape...

Too late!

The Criminal Genius once again blew into his silver whistle, releasing a strident sound.

And Jerome Fandor, who maintained his composure despite his rage, realized what the terrible monster’s sinister plans were.

In a second, the acrobats, who were obviously his accomplices, had performed an abominable feat. They had released the net that hung above the room, allowing it to fall to the ground. They quickly attached it to hooks that had been prepared in advance and then they picked up revolvers, and waited, motionless.

And, under the net, caught in a trap, caught as if in a mouse trap, the spectators, who had stumbled over one another, had tipped over, like a horrible swarming mass of insects, were fighting, tearing at one another, screaming, crying out for help, in the throes of fear.

What was happening?

None of those who have lived through those terrible minutes, possibly not even Fandor, could ever say exactly what happened.

In the human swarm that filled the gigantic net held by Fantomas, the wretch’s accomplices fished the prisoners out, one by one.

They were half gagged, three-quarters strangled, then searched and cast aside, stunned, a bit farther off. It was a gigantic roundup. Valuable jewelry, wallets, purses were mercilessly stolen.

No one was able to resist.

And, as the bandits were stripping their victims of their valuables, in the net, where the number of prisoners gradually decreased, nameless chaos continued to reign, as countless human bodies struggled, groaning in fear.

Jerome Fandor had perhaps been one of the first to be seen by Fantomas’ accomplices.

That saved him.

They did not recognize him and searched him as they did the others and then knocked him out with a wicked blow to the head.

When Jerome Fandor came to, the arena was deserted. Bodies were strewn about him, lying on the ground, motionless. Fantomas and his men had disappeared. No doubt the police were on their way.

Jerome Fandor, as energetic as usual, got up. He walked ahead, stumbling, with a great deal of pain, yet he walked straight ahead.

“Ah! Fantomas! Fantomas!” he shrieked, “we’ll never take our revenge on you! Your boundless audacity leads you into the wildest undertakings!”

And the unfortunate man went on his way, still dizzy, filled with obsessive, unhealthy thoughts of setting out on the bandit’s trail, and starting the battle all over again.

When Juve and Mr. Havard, who had been notified by telephone, arrived at Feeric City, with its frightened crowd, they did not find Fandor there.

Like a robot, Fandor kept walking straight ahead, feverish, delirious...



CHAPTER IX - Official Gala



Head bowed low, Juve returned home.

It was 11 o’clock at night and the policeman, had not had a moment’s rest since the morning. Yet, it was not fatigue that made him walk that way, head lowered, eyes vacant, hands clasped behind his back, in a gloomy attitude of despair and weariness.

If Juve was frightfully sad, if, all in all, he was prey to a sort of concentrated fury, it was because he had just left Mr. Havard, he had just come from Feeric City, where Juve and Mr. Havard had helped the pitiful victims of the dreadful Fantomas.

Juve was very impressed, even disturbed by the audacity that the Criminal Mastermind had once again demonstrated.

It was true! Fantomas implemented sinister plans which he had stressed in the letter addressed to the chief of police, which Mr. Havard related precisely to Juve!

It was real! The torturer seemed once again to have dedicated himself to cursing the entire city and Paris was supposed to tremble once again under the perpetual threat of his unimaginable, incomprehensible feats, that surpassed the limits of reasonable minds.

Furious, Juve walked up the small Rue de Steinkerque on his way to Rue Tardieu, muttering under his breath, clenching his fists and uttering heavy threats, resounding curses, in a low voice, tinged with madness.

“It was abominable,” he grumbled. “In broad daylight, in the heart of Paris, trapping over 500 people in a net, stripping them of their belongings without encountering any resistance, then disappearing, fleeing, hiding in the frightened crowd, mocking the police. That’s what Fantomas has just done!”

And the good Juve was so angry that, despite his usual composure, he continued to swear.

“My God! My God!”

Then, suddenly he stopped short, giving a formidable kick to the cobblestone, drumming on it with his foot.

“This has to stop. We can’t let this kind of thing keep happening. The Tsar does not have his necklace, the spectators at the Folies-Francaises have been threatened with assassination, the visitors to Feeric City have been attacked. No, no, it can’t continue.”

Juve started walking again. Unfortunately, despite his anger, despite all his rage, Juve was too much in control of his nerves to be able to forget, even for an instant, the rules of logic he held so dear.

He said that it could not continue... How childish! Had it not been going on for 20 years now? Didn’t Fantomas design and implement his abominable projects every single minute? Had he not proclaimed himself the Master of All and Everything? Could anyone deny that the entire universe was under his hand, under his domination?

Juve closed his eyes, as if dazzled.

A hallucinating vision danced beneath his closed eyelids.

Like some gigantic, fantastic allegory, he seemed to see, sitting astride an infernal steed, the Master of Fear, draped in his black tights, hands in black gloves, face covered by a black mask, galloping around the world while everyone fled before him, shrieking in fright, overwhelmed with terror.

I can’t stop him!” Juve moaned, in a voice that was almost a lament.

That hour when the policeman once again touched the depths of despair was painful.

For years, he had dedicated his life to this sublime undertaking.

For years, he had set aside his life to fulfill his mission. He had spent years patiently, tenaciously, using his skills as a policeman to oppose the Mad Torturer.

Juve had public approval on his side; he had the law to support him. And that still was not enough to defeat the man who embodied evil, who never retreated, who had no conscience, no heart, no pity and no mercy.

“Ah! The wretch!” grumbled Juve. “How many cadavers will he sow in his wake and why does he not fear drowning in all of the blood he has spilled, which falls behind him like red rain, on his unfortunate victims?”

Juve was allowing himself to be carried away by the dream, to be overwhelmed with the despair that rose from this moment of powerless.

That was just cowardice!

Who is entitled to dream when action is calling? Who can dream when it is time to fight?

“That’s enough of that,” Juve swore. “This is no time for daydreaming. Fantomas has acted; he must be punished.”

Juve was overwhelmed, exhausted. For months, he had been living a mad existence, without stopping for a second, without a moment’s respite, without an instant of peace.

It didn’t matter that he still wanted to fight, he wanted it now!

The policeman shrugged with that powerful, formidable movement of his shoulders that all his close friends knew.

It was as if he were shaking off the burden of worries that swamped him. It was if he were shaking off his fears.

“Let’s get down to work,” he murmured.

And he picked up his pace.

Juve was determined. He knew what he wanted to do. He had a plan.

“I’ll go home,” he said to himself. “I’ll go to bed. I need a good night’s sleep. Tomorrow, at four in the morning, Jean will wake me up. Then, I’ll study the entire file Havard gave me and I will start my investigation... It’s up to the two of us, Fantomas. If you want to frighten Paris, you’ll find me standing in front of the city. You enjoy hitting France at its heart; I enjoy defending my country.”

When he arrived at the door to his home, Juve automatically stopped to buy the evening editions of the newspapers from a paper boy who yelled as he ran.

“This will be useful,” Juve thought. “I know from Fandor that journalists are often well-

informed. Maybe Ill find something in these papers, some interesting details about the drama at Feeric City.”

Juve walked quickly pasted the concierge’s booth. He didn’t want anyone to know he was in Paris.

Of course, he had no intention of hiding but, in any case, he did not want people to report on his return too soon. It would have served no purpose and could even hamper him. First of all, he intended to search for the necklace he had claimed he would return to the Tsarita; being incognito could be of use and he intended to remain that way as long as possible.

As he walked up the stairs, Juve said, “For example, I hope that, along with my mail, Jean will hand me a letter or a telegram from Fandor. My young couple must be growing worried about what has happened to me... My stupid arrest in St. Petersburg prevented me from joining Helene and Fandor, but they must have suspected that I was caught up in an adventure and they should have written to me here.”

And at that very moment, Juve thought, “Will I let them know I’ve arrived? Will I summon Fandor?”

Visibly, the policeman hesitated. He had just realized that Fandor might not be of great assistance to him for the investigations he was about to conduct. Moreover, he hesitated to take the young man away from the pleasant hours he must be spending in Helene's company.

“Good grief, no!” Juve decided, as he reached the level on which his apartment was located. “I won’t let Fandor known. The poor boy definitely deserves a peaceful honeymoon. I’ll find a way to reassure him about my situation, but I’ll tell him that I do not need his help.”

And smiling, Juve added, “Let’s leave the lovers together, let’s leave Helene with Fandor!”

Juve would, however, have come to a completely different conclusion if he had known about all of the events that had taken place before his arrival, if he had suspected that Helene had been injured in the attack on the Folies-Francaises, and that Fandor had been involved, that very same day, in the goings on at Feeric City.

Yet, since, he knew nothing of all this, Fandor rang the doorbell of his apartment.

“Jean must certainly be back!” he supposed.

But this was not the policeman's lucky day.

Jean, who was still acting as a nursemaid for Helene was, naturally, not in the apartment on the Rue Tardieu. Juve could ring and ring, but no one would answer.

The policeman frowned.

“Well,” he thought. “This is all a little bit too much. I could accept, at the most, that Jean went to cheer on the Tsar and the Tsarita this afternoon but, my word, I can’t believe that he’s spending the night out. What can his absence mean?’’

Juve stood, for a moment, stunned, in front of the door to his apartment, which remained obstinately closed.

“Now this is stranger,” he said. “Even worrisome. I need to look into this!”

And, naturally, Juve decided, “Well, too bad for the owner. I hope I don’t cause too much damage.”

Juve, like all policeman, could have made an excellent burglar. He was most thoroughly familiar with the means for knocking down a door without making any noise. He had practiced his skill in the past when, after discovering his passion for police work, he was preparing, as a young man, to enter the force.

“One... two... three...”

He placed his shoulder against one side of the door, bent his knees, shoved solidly and, without a sound, lifted the door that was keeping him out, off its hinges.

Juve walked into his antechamber without the slightest difficulty. Without the slightest difficulty and as a result of his prodigious skill, he put the door back on its hinges.

“There!” he declared, in a satisfied tone, “No one will ever suspect that I’ve entered. Parisian homes are definitely not well built. I will have to get a better locking system.”

At that moment, Juve suddenly stopped talking.

It was madness, but a terrible thought had crossed his mind.

Jean had not answered... Jean did not seem to be in the apartment, when he should have been there... Did that mean something? Was it possible that his dedicated servant had been involved in some sort of accident, even that Fantomas, out of cruelty, out his love for evil, had made the poor servant pay for what he felt toward Juve?

At that very moment, the policeman drew on all his resources.

“Jean! Jean! Are you there?”

No one answered, of course.

Nervous, worried despite everything, Juve raced through his apartment.

At every open door, at every room he entered, he feared that he would discover something horrible... his murdered servant!

But, his fear was caused by his fatigue, the nervousness of the moment. Definitely nothing had happened in this peaceful apartment. Juve found everything in order, everything as usual.

“I’m certainly going mad,” the excellent policeman concluded, as he took off his hat and coat. “Let’s go look at the mail!”

Juve quickly went through the large stack of letters waiting for him and which Jean, naturally, had not forwarded, since Juve had not been able to give him an address in Russia.

“Nothing!" the policeman declared soon, wearily pushing aside the letters he had examined. “Nothing of interest. And, what’s more important, nothing from Fandor. What could have happened to Fandor on the one hand and Jean on the other?”

This little mystery intrigued Juve, despite himself.

Yet, he could not be all that worried since, it was too obvious that if a catastrophe had occurred, if something had happened to Fandor, to Helene, even to old Jean, the newspapers would have mentioned it and that was not the case.

“I’ll leave the serious business for tomorrow!" Juve decided. “At my age, I need to take care of myself at all costs. I’m dead tired, so I’ll go to bed.”

Juve, in fact, went to bed. He had already prepared his blankets when he suddenly thought about the newspapers he had purchased earlier.

“In fact,” he thought. “I’ll still take a look at them. They might just contain an interesting piece of news...”

He unfolded one of the papers, quickly read through the report on the sinister adventure at Feeric City and then, despite himself, starting to glance through the columns dedicated to the festivities marking the arrival of the Tsar.

“Well, today there will be a gala at the Opera,” thought Juve. “The government came up with the great idea of holding it this very evening! The royal couple must be as tired as I am. In any case, they’ll enjoy listening to the music!"

Juve laughed at his own irony when, suddenly he jumped and looked up with the expression of someone trying to remember something.

“But what if I’m wrong? Would I perhaps, fail my word of honor? I swore to the Tsar that I would bring back the necklace Fantomas stole, on the day the Opera gala would be held..

Juve meditated for a moment.

“Bah!” he said. “Too bad! I’m not going to get in a tizzy about that. Of course, I won’t be respecting my word, but I’ll do it tomorrow. Moreover, if I haven’t returned the necklace it’s all the fault of Nicolas II who delayed me in Russia. I figured that I would find the famous missing diamonds rather quickly. I do have an idea...”

As he said those words, Juve smiled with a sarcastic expression. Once again he opened the newspaper in front of him and started to read.

Suddenly, Juve jumped.

“That, for example...” he started to say.

And, no longer thinking about going to bed, the policeman started pacing back and forth in his room.

“What does that mean?” he muttered. “Who could have given that information to the newspapers? Someone is playing a bad trick on me. Someone is playing a bad trick on the Tsar and the Tsarita...”

Juve seemed nervous and preoccupied. The blood was pounding in his head as he crumpled the newspaper in fury, looking most upset.

“That,” he added, “complicates my personal situation... If I only knew who wrote that piece...”

And, at that moment, Juve suddenly stopped pacing. He turned pale, chewed on his lips, then spoke out loud, saying, “Could it be Fantomas? If that miserable wretch released that piece of news just to mock me...”

Juve went to pick up a second newspaper, one he had not yet unfolded. He glanced quickly through the columns dedicated to the visit of the Russian royals.

Then, shivering, he said, “Here’s the same news item. This is definitely a challenge. It’s so stupid in the end...”

And he read a brief news item that all of the evening newspapers had published:

This evening, in keeping with the final program of the festivities, the Tsar and the Tsarita will go to the gala organized at the Opera.

There's no question that the people of Paris will give a triumphant welcome to the two sympathetic sovereigns and their allies. Paris will be touched to see that the Tsarita will put on the famous necklace to attend the gala, the very necklace that demonstrates the full glory of her jewelry case and has been involved in such amazing adventures.

The necklace, in fact, had been stolen, according to the police, by the formidable Fantomas, and Juve, the famous Juve had managed to return it to its legitimate owner.

By wearing the necklace, the Tsarita will honor Paris and provide amiable and spiritual evidence of her appreciation for the famous policeman, Juve.

“Those imbeciles,” fumed Fandor’s friend.

And he crumpled the second newspaper, just as he had crumpled the first.

Juve paced back and forth. Obviously, he was quite upset by the news item that presented a false situation.

Suddenly, he took out his watch.

“What time is it?” the policeman asked. “A quarter after ten... Damn! It’s too late to try anything at all. The performance must certainly have started.”

Juve hesitated for a moment, then decided, “Bah! Too bad. Let’s be brave! We have to go there. We have to see, we have to know...”

And as he got dressed, Juve sighed, saying, “No rest for me tonight!”

At a quarter to nine, the large personal maid responsible for dressing the Tsarita took a few steps back, clasping her hands in admiration, enthusiastically assessing the ceremonial dress donned by the Empress of Russia.

“Do I look all right?” the wife of Nicolas II quietly asked, getting dressed more to honor Paris than out any sense of elegance. “Will I deserve the compliments that the press will make tomorrow?”

The maid did not hesitate, “Your Majesty is divinely beautiful. Your Majesty’s attire is ravishing."

“And my hair?”

“Your hair is perfect, your Majesty. All of the

Parisian ladies will be jealous.”

No woman could remain insensitive to such praise. Although she was not the simplest of women, the most modest of queens, the Tsarita still shivered when listening to her maid.

“Well,” she said. “In any case, I’m ready. His Majesty is as well, I believe?”

The maid bowed, saying, “His Majesty asked me to say that he is ready for her Majesty the Empress.”

“In that case, I’ll join him.’

As quietly as possible, the Empress Alexandra prepared to walk across the large room in which she had just finished dressing to join Nicolas II who was, no doubt, waiting for in a neighboring dressing room, smoking one of his eternal cigarettes.

And the people of Paris would have been most surprised to witness the simplicity of the imperial couple who looked like any ordinary middleclass couple on their way to the theatre.

The Tsarita had dressed with the assistance of a single maid, she was late, as all women are, and the Tsar was muttering while smoking his cigarette, something all men who take their wives to the theatre do!

Yet, as the Tsarita was about the leave the room, the maid said, “Your Majesty is not putting any jewelry on?”

“No,” answered the Tsarita. “The only jewelry I want to wear is the famous diamond necklace.”

“Juve didn’t return it to you?” the maid asked, curious.

The Empress did not answer and merely nodded her head.

A few seconds later, however, the imperial couple climbed into a carriage.

According to the program for the evening, the Tsarita and the Tsar were to watch the gala performance from a booth where there would be alone. The President of the Republic, in fact, would only turn up to greet the imperial couple near the end of the second act, before the ballet. But that did not mean, of course, that the Russian sovereigns would not be greeted with the greatest pump. The carriages that carried them along boulevards black with people, were gala carriages.

A cavalry squadron surrounded the, and people called out “Long live the Tsar” all along the route.

In the Opera theatre, an ovation was planned. People talked about the marvels of the final program, and the notes of the Havas, the telephone calls from the Prefecture to the sovereigns’ secretary, announcing that the hall would be admirably beautiful, that all of Paris would be on hand, and that they would be decked out in all their finery for the imperial couple, wearing fabulous diamonds and all of the finery that could be found in Paris.

“What a superb festivity!" said the Tsarita, as she took her place in the official carriage next to Tsar Nicola, who sat tall on his cushion in order to look as tall as the Tsarita.

Yet, Nicolas II shook his head, looking ill-tempered.

“Is your Majesty worried?” asked the Tsarita, concerned as always by the Tsar’s perpetual sadness.

The Tsar replied in a dry tone, “A bit.”

“About what, sire?”

The Tsar turned to look at he and said, “You should know, madam!”

And, as the Tsarita looked at him, astonished, Nicolas II explained, lowering his voice, so that none of the officials who were naturally seated in the front seats and the impeccable valets standing on the springs could hear.

“Madam, you should understand that I am concerned. All of the newspapers have been saying that you will be wearing your necklace... Yet we do not have that necklace...”

“But we will have it,” the Tsarita replied in a concerned tone of voice.

“Your Majesty merely supposes that we will, she can’t be certain!”

The Tsarita replied in a surprised tone that she took no pains to hide, “I don’t understand what your Majesty is saying. Earlier, your Majesty had one of his chamberlains tell me not to wear anything other than the necklace. I concluded that the necklace had been found, that Juve had brought it back, just as he had promised to do. Is that not so?”

“It is not so at all,” grumbled the Tsar.

And in a gloomy voice, the ruler of all the Russias went on to explain, “This evening, all of the newspapers have published an item announcing that you will wear this necklace. I was most surprised. I immediately summoned Mr. Havard, the head of the French police, and he said that the information could only have come from Juve and that, as a result, Juve had to have the necklace. That’s all I know!”

The Tsar fell silent for a moment, then added,

“It is possible that Juve did not have the time to come to the Palais d’Orsay before you left and went directly to the opera instead. That’s where he will give us the necklace that he has taken back from that cursed Fantomas. That’s all I can tell you.”

A quarter of an hour later, the Tsar and the Tsarita glanced at one another, concerned. The imperials were still in the antechamber and neither had taken a seat on the ceremonial chairs prepared for them.

What was going on?

The problem was that the Tsarita still did not have her necklace.

Juve who was not the author of the information that had been published in the newspapers, had not brought it. Moreover, it was impossible for the Tsarita to break protocol by not wearing any jewelry. What could be done under the circumstances?

The Tsar, who was still convinced that the information had come from Juve, wanted to hear nothing about a rather easy compromise, namely the fact that the empress could put on a few bits of jewelry intended to deceive the public.

“Let's wait,” said the Tsar. “There’s no reason we have to be in the opera box before the second act and, since Juve has announced that you will be wearing the necklace, madam, that is what you shall do!”

Now, the Tsar and Tsarita had been waiting for about ten minutes, quite put out by the incident, and already the officials on hand were starting to grow concerned when something unexpected, something mad, something fantastic, something terrifying occurred.

Suddenly, while the chorus was quietly accompanying a divine melody, a spectator in the audience stood up. This spectator, as if overcome with madness, jostled all of his neighbors, throwing himself forwards, gesticulating. At the same time as he was fleeing, the man shouted, “Fire! Fire!”

And the most frightening panic washed over the crowded theatre. Everyone stood up at the same time and soon a thousand voices were shouting, “Fire! Fire!”

And then a voice, an abominable voice cried out, “Every man for himself! Every man for himself!”

Chaos reigned.

In vain, in a precipitous movement, the stage manager moved to the controls of the curtain, which slowly started to drop.

In vain, the spectators called out, “Stay calm! Stay calm! There is no fire!”

It was impossible to calm the fear that had overwhelmed everyone.

There was no fire. No flames could be seen. And yet, people shoved, crushed through the doors, while, in the distance, gunshots rang out as the frenzied spectators shot their pocket revolvers randomly.

Paris would only learn the truth the next morning.

It was terrible.

The frenzied panic at the Opera was just another consequence of the formidable cruelty of the Criminal Mastermind, the King of Fear, Fantomas.

Most certainly, it was one of Fantomas’ accomplices who had shouted “Fire! Fire” triggering the frenzied panic.

Proof of this came from the fact that, during the panic, when people were trampling one another in the aisles, men, miserable wretches, posted here and there, had taken advantage of the general chaos to relieve women of their jewelry, tear of diamond tiaras, cut the strings of pearl necklaces.

And Fantomas had been seen.

He had been seen, with a dagger in his hand, as he climbed up to the royal box where, overwhelmed with fear, the Tsar and the Tsarita were wondering if they should flee, throw themselves into the crowd, or wait for help that might not come.

Fantomas had been seen!

Witnesses swore they had seen him!

But, they also said that, at that moment, a man had raced toward him, a man had chased him and then disappeared, a man the witnesses swore was none other than Juve.

The panic lasted into the night. Two hours after it had started, the Tsar and Tsarita, were taken out of their royal box, where they had been waiting in terror.



CHAPTER X - Incognito



Fear does not reason, and cannot be calmed or ordered by sheer willpower. That is an indisputable fact and Nicolas II, the Tsar of all the Russias, could perhaps, more than anyone else, support that theory by providing evidence.

Nicolas II was not brave. In Russia, he constantly feared the attacks of the nihilists, he was constantly in fear, he constantly took numerous precautions to avoid death, which was both threatening and imminent.

The Tsar did not dare walk under the large lights at Tsarskoye Selo, afraid that they would fall on his head. He never stood in front of a window, fearing that someone would shoot at him through it. When he wanted to sit down in a chair, he would ask all those around him to sit down in it first, to make certain that no bomb was hidden in that piece of furniture. His precautions extended to his police force. He paid a multitude of secret agents to spy on one another and prepare individual reports on the least significant events, on the small adventures of ordinary life.

Yet, this frightened sovereign, this unfortunate wretch who lived the life of the damned, in constant fear of an assassin’s blade, a nihilist’s bomb, this Russian who would never dare walk 50 yards alone in the street in Russia, without mobilizing an entire escort, a regime of soldiers, this man who, since he had been in France, breathing freely, suddenly, and for no good reason, found himself freed from all his fears.

Since setting foot on French soil, since detraining in Dunkerque, the Tsar had, in fact, become quite a different man.

What usually terrified the unfortunate sovereign was, in fact, the possibility of revenge on the part of the nihilists. Yet, with childish reasoning, the Tsar told himself that the nihilists were Russian subjects and that, as a result, once he was in France, there was nothing to fear from them.

Perhaps Nicolas II would have felt much less reassured if he had known that the police were terribly concerned about the dangers he could encounter during his official visit. Of course, as a precautionary measure, all of the Polish refugees had been arrested and placed under police supervision. Of course, the august visitor was under the constant supervision of a large number of officers. Yet that did not keep Mr. Havard from counting the hours until the blessed moment when Nicolas II would go back to his home, removing a terrible burden from the man’s shoulders.

The events seemed to support the nervous pessimism of the unhappy Mr. Havard.

The panic that had overtaken the Opera had quite naturally caused an enormous amount of emotion. It was a total miracle that it had not had any unfortunate consequences for the imperial couple, it was a true wonder that neither the Tsar nor the Tsarita, panicked by the threat of the hypothetical fire, had rushed into the crowd where, without a doubt, no one would have respected their august personalities and where, as a result, they would have been at the mercy of the common fear, which had resulted in a true disaster.

The tragic night of the official gala was destined, in fact, to remain in the frightened mind of Paris for all time.

The audacity of the criminal genius had caused an abominable catastrophe. People had literally crushed one another in the aisles of the Grand Opera. The panic had degenerated into a frightening crush, causing death and injury. Women had been stomped on, revolvers had been fired and, when the police finally managed to enter the facility, more than 40 bodies were found, horribly mutilated, their injuries, providing evidence of abominable suffering and nightmarish agonies.

Yet, the Tsar and the Tsarita retained no bad memories of that evening. Perhaps the sovereigns did not realize what exactly the savage scene they had witnessed from afar meant.

They were taken out of the opera house, not through the common entrances, but through the corridors used by management. The Tsar had no idea about the scope of the catastrophe. And, since no one mentioned it to him and since he only saw the smiling faces of obliging courtiers, or completely serene officials, the Tsar had no idea that both he and his august spouse had managed to escape from a truly horrible death.

Moreover, the Tsar had other concerns.

While the catastrophe at the opera house seemed unimportant to him, he was truly distraught and even furious at the thought that the fabulous diamond necklace stolen by Fantomas had not been found.

And the Tsar had still had no news of Juve!

That enraged him, drove him into a frenzy of fury particularly since, as the sovereign of all the Russias, Nicolas II was not used to being thwarted, even in insignificant matters.

And for that reason, while people at the Prefecture were frightened, while all of Paris shivered when reading the details of the abominable catastrophe at the opera house in the newspapers the next morning, when the Tsar woke up at the Palais d’Orsay, he simply asked, “Well, why hasn’t Juve brought back the necklace since he had sent a note to the newspapers that the Tsarita would be wearing it last evening?’’

Naturally, the Tsar could not find any answer to his question since there was no answer and since, in actual fact, it had not been Juve but Fantomas who had provided the information to the newspapers.

Nevertheless, Nicolas II managed to form an opinion that was quite likely.

He thought, “It is very possible, that Juve intended to bring it to us at the Opera but it is possible that he arrived just as people started shouting about the fire and that the panic caused by those cries prevented him from joining us in our box.”

Nicolas II, who was still in bed, thought about this for a few moments, yawning, and then suddenly sat up in bed, filled with joy.

“Well, too bad. I’ll take the chance,” he murmured.

And he burst out into laughter and added, “It’s my turn to plot!"

Assuredly, a joyous thought had just crossed the imperial sovereign’s mind. He was smiling, in fact. He seemed most amused, perhaps even forgetting the lost necklace which had caused him such concern.

The Tsar reached out his hand and rang the bell.

Almost immediately, the door to his bedchamber opened and his personal valet rushed in and bent over double in an endless bow.

“Bonjour, Provik,” Nicolas II said, in a familiar tone. “What is the weather like this morning?”

“May it please your sire, the weather is infinitely fine.”

“Cold? Warm?”

“May it please your Majesty, the weather is warm, warm French weather!”

The Tsar rubbed his hands like a man who once again seems particularly pleased.

“So much the better!" he murmured. Yet, a shadow seemed to pass over his face.

“Provik, come here. Listen to me.”

“Your Majesty, I’m all ears.”

“Swear to me that you will be discreet.”

“Your Majesty knows that he can trust me.”

“Provik, you will bring me my blue suit and my bowler hat. You will also bring me my cane with the silver handle and my gray gloves. Understand?”

Provik, the valet, listed to his orders with as much emotion as if he were being sentenced to death. He clasped his hands, his lips quivered, and he murmured in a low voice, “May the Holy Images bless you! May the Lord and the Madonna come to your aid...”

Then, shuddering, he took a chance and asked, “Your Majesty has made a decision?”

“Yes.”

“Nothing can make your Majesty change his mind?”

“Absolutely nothing, replied the Tsar.

“Does your Majesty know that he is taking a great risk?”

The Tsar jumped out of bed.

“Provik, my old friend Provik,” he said. “You are part of the plot. So, you have nothing to say. If I'm taking a risk, then I’ll take a risk. Besides, I believe that you’re exaggerating. Danger here in France? Did the defunct king of Belgium, did my excellent relative Edward VII...”?

“That’s not the same thing,” the servant interrupted.

But Nicolas II merely shrugged and asked, “Why not?”

“Because,” said Provik, who was obviously far less impressed by the Tsar than a prime minister would be, given the adage that ‘no one is a great man to his valet’. “Because, sire, the Belgian king and Edward VII as well, were almost Parisians.”

The servant seemed to be reproaching Nicolas II, who suddenly burst out laughing.

“And you do not consider me worthy of becoming a Parisian? Good grief, you’ve offended me. You should go to the mines. Don’t worry, I’ll show you mercy. But hurry up!”

Provik must have run out of arguments because he stopped hesitating. He went to get the clothes the Tsar had specified and took charge of dressing his master, an operation that took a fair amount of time, since Nicolas II believed in the effectiveness of medicine, and followed an entire series of treatments that complicated his life enormously.

Provik was part of the plot...

But what plot was this?

The Tsar seemed to grow more and more joyous and the servant more and more concerned, his face darkening with each second.

After a moment, Provik asked, “Does his Majesty not want to change his mind?"

“Never."

“Will his Majesty permit me to accompany him?"

“I forbid it, Provik. I absolutely forbid it!"

The Tsar had just donned his wig and a bowler hat and laughed as he looked at himself in the mirror, since he was obviously not used to wearing a hat and found his attire amusing.

Yet, a few moments later, after Nicolas II had studied himself sufficiently in the large mirror in his dressing room, the imperial personality turned to his personal valet and gave him a specific order, saying, “You will go to the door of my bed chamber. You will open it and you will look down the corridor. There must be no one there!”

“Yes, your Majesty.”

As Provik set out to follow his instructions, the Tsar called him back.

“Wait! You’re too hasty. It’s not just that there must be no one in the corridor, you must also make sure there are no curious onlookers in the service stairway, the stairway you mentioned to me before.”

“Yes, your Majesty.”

“Wait another moment, Provik. Once you have made sure the premises are deserted, you will rush back here, I will wait near the door. When you give the sign, I’ll rush out. God help me! But, I’ll run as fast as I can. I expect to get outside without any unfortunate encounters.”

This was all rather mysterious and the instructions seemed most unusual. A stranger no doubt would not have understood them, but Provik seemed to understand their hidden meaning.

The servant disappeared for a few moments, then returned.

“The way is clear,” murmured Provik.

“Fine,” said the Tsar.

And the sovereign ran, he ran on his tiptoes, to avoid making the slightest noise, leaving the room where he had been waiting.

What was the reason for all this? Anyone who would have seen Nicolas II leaving the Palais d’Orsay by way of a hidden staircase, who would have noticed him, a few moments later, leaving the sumptuous building through a low door, hailing a carriage, instructing the driver to take him to the Place de la Concorde, then jumping out of the vehicle at the foot of the Obelisque would have been most surprised.

That person would have sworn that the Tsar was quite simply making his escape. The Tsar would have been taken for an escaping prisoner.

For a long time, in fact, Nicolas had been considering going on an adventure. The most autocratic of monarchs, the most luxurious of potentates, the most ardently defended of princes had experienced a childish desire to walk about on his own, for once, without an escort, without guards, without agents, to stroll about the streets and look at the shops!

The shops. They were a dream come true.

Nicolas II wanted to take the time to contemplate everything at his leisure, to look at the displays, to stroll through the stands. He dreamed of being jostled by the crowd, insulted by some passerby. He dreamed, above all, of setting aside the grandeur of his role for a few moments, of being no more than a common onlooker, unknown, unsuspected, who would be free to spend five minutes in a cafe, to buy a newspaper for a penny, and to walk into a tobacconist’s shop!

Nicolas II desired all of these fantasies, with the same ardor that the little French imperial prince had, a few months before the frightful drama of 1870, asked his tutor, as a reward, to allow him to tour the Tuileries, walking in a creek, getting his feet wet like all children in Paris.

Since Nicolas II knew full well that it would be impossible to fulfill his fantasy in Russia, he had decided to make the attempt in Paris. And, for this reason, he had plotted with his valet, coming up with a plan that would enable him to deceive both the people who surrounded him and avoid the surveillance of the French police, who were responsible for his safety.

Nicolas II had believed that it would be a most difficult undertaking. Yet, quite the contrary, he had encountered no difficulty and was now laughing out loud as he thought of the agitation of his senior advisors when he told them about his escapade.

Nicolas II paid his driver royally and walked over to the Place de la Concorde and from there to the boulevards.

He walked, cane under his arm, one hand in a pocket, looking every which way, turning back to make sure he was not followed, with the joyful satisfaction of a child on his first outing alone.

“How amusing... how very amusing,” he thought.

And he decided to take part in all of the activities he had dreamed of in a few minutes.

The Tsar walked into a tobacconist’s shop. He drank a glass of beer at the corner of Rue Scribe, he purchased a newspaper near the opera house and, joy of joys, was accosted by a woman near Rue Taitbout!

“Come with my, my handsome blond,” the passing woman murmured.

The Tsar, naturally, could not accept the invitation, but his chest did swell with pride. The dubious flattery and adulation of arch-duchesses looking for pensions had never flattered him to such an extent.

Yet. as the Tsar was reaching Rue Montmartre, a man approached him, with a familiar manner. He held a cigarette in his hand and tipped his hat slightly.

“Do you have a light?”

“Yes,” said the Tsar, offering the man his cigarette.

The stranger lit his own cigarette without hurrying.

“Thank you?

But, after starting to head off, he turned back.

“In fact, sir,” he said. “You don’t look like you’re from Paris. Would you perhaps need a guide? I’m out of work. For five or six francs, I’ll show you some remarkable sights!”

The Tsar smiled at that. The man to whom he had just given a light, the man who was proposing to serve as a guide, was poorly yet cleanly dressed. He was not a laborer, but rather some kind of office employee, wretched and hungry, a child of Paris, obviously, since he had working-class accent, the deep, deep joking tones of those who came from Pantruche.

Yet the Tsar hesitated visibly.

For a few moments, in fact, the imperial personality felt some concern. He had walked straight ahead, without noting the route he had taken and now he did not quite know how to make his way back to the Quai d’Orsay.

To be truthful, Nicolas II was not unaware that he could ask some policeman. But he was afraid of being recognized and then the taste for adventure overtook him once more and wondered what the remarkable sites the man proposed to show him could well be.

“My dear friend,” replied the Tsar. “I would

willingly accept your offer if you truly had something interesting to show me. What do you propose?”

“Well, well, well,” replied the man. “If I tell you, then you will go and see them on your own! Call yourself up another carriage, I give the address and then you scamper off. Is that it, mate?”

The Tsar had trouble following the man’s strange talk but he guessed, rather easily, that he was supposed to hail a carriage.

“Fine, let’s take a carriage,” he agreed.

“Fine, my prince!”

The Tsar’s extraordinary guide immediately called a taxi.

“To Montmartre!” he ordered. “Hurry up, old man. Whip up your old nags. You’ll carry us up to the outer boulevards.’

Then he jumped into the carriage.

The Tsar did not feel terribly reassured. At that moment, Nicolas II suddenly understood the foolishness of his action. Thoughts of kidnapping, tales of mysterious assassinations came to mind... After all, he had been unacceptably careless by agreeing to accompany an individual he had met purely by chance.

And, as the man had barely climbed into the carriage, the Tsar’s concern increased significantly.

The man, in fact, was undergoing a rapid transformation. Far from taking his seat next to the sovereign, he lowered a jump seat, sat down on it, then bowed respectfully.

“Please excuse me, your Majesty...” he started. “What?” the Tsar said, startled.

“Please excuse me, your Majesty,” he repeated. “First for having recognized you, then for approaching you and finally for lying to you...”

Overwhelmed with panic, the Tsar beseeched the man, asking “Who are you?”

But the man shook his head.

“Please excuse me, your Majesty! Time is of an essence and your Majesty must not interrupt me!”

The Tsar, pale with terror, indicated that he was all ears.

Extraordinarily calm, the man continued, “I'm not the wretch I seem to be. Your Majesty will understand that I am with the police. Oh, I'm not a regular officer, just a poor chap who earns his living as he can, by taking on hazardous adventures. But that’s not important. I am in a position to give your Majesty the most important of services and I’m convinced that your Majesty will be able to reward me most appropriately?”

There was a question in that sentence.

Embarrassed, the Tsar replied, “What do you want, sir? What service do you propose to offer me? Why have you approached me in this manner?”

The man looked up and said, “Because your

Majesty has been betrayed!”

“Betrayed?” the Tsar, replied, livid. “What do you mean?”

“This,” replied the man. “I know where the necklace your Majesty lost can be found. I know who has the necklace that was supposedly stolen by Fantomas. I know where it is hidden, I know who has it.”

At that moment, the Tsar wondered if he were having a nightmare, if he were going quite mad. Here he was in a carriage, bouncing over the cobblestones of Paris, having a conversation with a stranger and this stranger was offering, to a certain extent, to find the lost necklace, the necklace that was so terribly valuable...

It was unthinkable!

“Talk!" said the Tsar.

“Your wish is my command.”

And, crossing his arms, the man coldly said, “The necklace your Majesty is looking for is in the possession of that famous policeman, Juve, who is an infamous thief. The necklace is currently hidden in the lining of the vest Juve wears when he is at home.”

“Mercy!” shouted the Tsar.

An hour later, Nicolas II, overwhelmed with panic, looking lost, eyes wild, walked down the small stairway on Rue Tardieu, and out of Juve’s house.

Of course, the Tsar looked lost. Since the morning, he had experienced emotions so intense, surprises that were so extraordinary, that he felt he was losing his mind.

First and foremost, he had already been somewhat overwhelmed by his solitary stroll through Paris. Then he had encountered the extraordinary police informer who had claimed that Juve was a thief.

Initially, the Tsar had not wanted to believe the man’s strange claims. But he had offered proof. He stated, that he had the key to Juve’s apartment. The policeman was not at home. They simply had to go there right away and enter the apartment. They would find the vest and in the vest they would find the stolen necklace.

Naturally, the Tsar had refused, out of fear, to take part in such a search. But the man had insisted. He was persuasive, and had subjugated the sovereign.

The mysterious passerby had taken the Tsar to Juve’s place. And the Tsar was now leaving Juve’s apartment. He had seen the policeman’s vest, he had felt the lining, he had felt the stolen necklace hidden in the fabric.

“This is mad. Quite mad!” the Tsar said as he parted ways with the guide, who claimed to be afraid of drawing attention in the neighborhood. “It’s mad! Quite mad! So it’s true that Juve, the famous Juve is a villain?”

Frightened, the Tsar ran as fast as he could. He wanted with all his being to go to the Prefecture, to sound the alarm. He had found the strength of mind not to take the stolen necklace back. He had left it in Juve’s vest, saying that in this way it would be possible to force the policemen to admit his terrible crime.

Yet, as the Tsar was running, the unfortunate sovereign fell victim to the most grotesque of accidents.

The neighborhood in which Rue de Steinkerque was located was not the most luxurious of neighborhoods. As he raced past a fruit store, he stepped on a peel and fell face down on the ground. Naturally, he was hurt, but he had no time to take pity on his fate since a group of people had already surrounded him.

“Your Majesty is not injured?” they asked. “Does your Majesty want to take a carriage? Does your Majesty want to return to Juve’s apartment? Your Majesty could rest there.”

And the Tsar understood the truth.

Those who surrounded him, those who came in growing numbers to help him, were simply policemen. Of course, he had believed that he was incognito, that he had slipped away from the surveillance of the Surete inspectors, but he had done nothing of the kind. The Paris police, quite accustomed to the escapades of monarchs, who liked to go strolling about on their own, had suspected his intentions and followed him.

They had never lost him from sight. He had been under their constant protection without knowing it.

The Tsar was flabbergasted!

An hour later, an epic scene took place in Juve’s office.

The Tsar was there, accompanied by Mr. Hennion and Mr. Havard, who had rushed there after receiving urgent telephone calls.

Juve was there as well.

The policeman had just arrived. He was covered with gray dust, he had bags under his eyes and his face was drawn. He looked exhausted.

Juve had, in fact, spent the entire night tracking Fantomas, who had escaped from him in the catastrophe at the Opera after Juve, revolver in hand, had blocked his way, preventing him from assassinating the Tsar and the Tsarita.

And, when he had returned home, Juve had been surprised to find the police and the emperor there. He listened to the explanations they gave him, nodding his heading, shrugging, occasionally verifying a word, a detail of the account he listened to.

“No,” said Juve. “I did not send the note. The person who had announced that the Tsarita would be wearing the famous necklace at the official gala was most certainly Fantomas, and Fantomas had no other goal than to embarrass me. But, please continue, your Majesty. The man who accosted you said that he knew where the necklace was, that he knew who the thief was? According to him, who is that individual?”

The Tsar spoke, while cautiously taking a place behind Mr. Havard.

“You, Juve!”

In response to that accusation, Juve naturally showed no sign of concern, and even smiled.

“Well,” he said. “That’s amusing!”

Then he asked, “Where did I place the necklace?”

Trembling, the Tsar replied immediately, “Don't try to lie, Juve. The necklace is on you.”

“Really?”

“It's in the lining of the vest you just put on.” “More and more interesting,” murmured Juve.

The policeman removed his vest, tore out the lining and, initially dumbfounded, took out the superb diamond necklace.

Juve seemed astonished just then.

“Good grief, I don’t understand” he admitted.

Then he handed the necklace to the Tsar.

“Is this the diamond necklace that was stolen from you?” he asked.

The Tsar looked triumphant. More than ever, he was convinced that Juve was a thief and

the only thing that surprised him was that Mr. Havard and Mr. Hennion had not rushed to arrest the wretch.

“Of course!" shrieked Nicolas II. “That's the stolen necklace. The setting, moreover, cannot be copied. Juve, you’ve been unmasked!”

“Indeed,” said the policeman.

Juve was thinking.

Suddenly, he asked, “I imagine you rewarded the honest informer who has unmasked me?”

The Tsar nodded his head proudly.

“I rewarded him immediately,” he said. “I gave him a check for one hundred thousand francs, which he must have cashed by now.”

“Fine!” replied Juve.

And, suddenly, the policeman turned to Mr. Havard, who did not know quite what to believe.

“Really,” murmured Juve. “This is all quite devious!”

And Juve shrugged with impatience, adding, “I have nothing to blame myself for. Honestly, I can’t be asked to save people despite themselves!”

And, after uttering these enigmatic words, Juve stared at the Tsar.

“Your Majesty,” he advised. “Please place the necklace on the floor.

It was a strange request, yet the Tsar obeyed, curious to see what Juve planned to do.

Juve, quietly took a step.

“A fake necklace,” he said. “A fake necklace breaks like this!”

Juve raised his foot and broke the Tsar’s so-called necklace.

He continued, “And since it breaks very easily, paying one hundred francs for it was a little steep!”

Juve’s action had stunned the unfortunate Tsar.

Clasping his hands, he asked, “So the necklace was fake?”

“Of course,” replied Juve, shrugging again. “Your Majesty, I regret to inform you that you have been robbed... robbed of one hundred thousand francs. Good grief! It’s a simple matter, your Majesty was sold a bunch of glass for that price!”

Then Juve shrugged again and asked, “Did the man who guided you to my apartment have a small graze on his right temple?”

“He did” said the Tsar, appalled.

“Well,” said Juve. “That merely proves that your Majesty spent twenty minutes with Fantomas and that if Fantomas did not kill you that was because he recognized the Surete agents who were following your Majesty!”

Juve sat down and crossed his arms.

“All in all," he concluded, “It was all a joke for Fantomas. He found it amusing to make people think, once again, that I am the thief. And he enjoyed his little joke all the more since he took advantage of the situation to steal one hundred thousand francs from you!”

Then, in a judgmental voice, Juve added, “Strolling about alone in Paris is quite dangerous!”

The Tsar was the only one who did not smile.



CHAPTER XI - The Mysterious House



Rue des Irlandais is a small, old street that looks deserted, with grass growing through the cobblestones. It's a street in the Latin quarter, that is no longer frequented by students and even less by the joyous party-goers of Boulevard Saint-Michel, a street that perhaps their fathers knew, fathers who willingly lived at the top of Mont Saint-Genevieve, no longer frequented by young scholars, who are more willing to go to the right bank, than the picturesque regions of a disappearing neighborhood.

Few people go to Rue des Irlandais for the good reason that few people live there. Long, rough walls border each side of it. Here and there a gate carved in the wall or a barred window, indicate to the passerby who has ventured into this place that, behind this wall, there is a dwelling where people live.

No noise is heard in the neighborhood and, at times, people have the impression that they are in the countryside. The few rare people who live on Rue des Irlandais know one another, having occasionally crossed paths when coming and going. Most of them are humble people, who live modestly, away from the spotlight, and who seem isolated in the midst of the hubbub of the capital like dead bodies in a cemetery.

The inhabitants of Rue des Irlandais include one man who, although he does not know all his neighbors, is known to them, even though he rarely leaves his home. He is an old man with a large white beard that reaches down to the middle of his chest and who, judging by his guttural accent and his bronzed tint, must come from some far-off country.

He was, moreover, not very talkative and never exchanged more than a few essential words with his neighbors. He was called Father Saul and that was about all anyone knew about him. He lived at No. 29 and whenever anyone came to his door, for any pretext, they had to wait a long time before the door would open.

Moreover, that door never opened completely. It barely opened and the enigmatic face of the tall old man would be framed by the crack between the door frame and the wall and his lips would utter a question so quietly it could barely be heard.

Saiil, no doubt in the manner of the people of his country, spoke plainly to all those who came to ring at his door, while treating them with the greatest respect.

“Good day, stranger," he would say, bowing deeply. “What happy reason has brought you to my door?"

And, if the visitor, either a curious passerby or an unemployed person, believed that he was being encouraged to prolong the conversation following this greeting, he was quickly disabused when it came to the old man’s real intentions.

If the unknown visitor did not explain himself in a few seconds, while standing on the doorstep, the door would close, and the tall old man would sigh, saying, “Unfortunately, I don’t understand what you want to tell me. Stranger, respect my solitude and go on your way.”

However, when the old man went out, which he happened to do about two o’clock in the afternoon, three times a week, he was affable and charitable. He made sure that the neighborhood children respected him, by giving them candy.

The old man’s few rare absences were also brief and people wondered what he could be doing in his home where no one ever entered, not even a cleaning lady.

The delivery men, those who brought his daily supplies, were mercilessly condemned to remain at the doorstep, never once entering the building.

How long had Father Saul been living there? People had always known him and the oldest people living on Rue des Irlandais would have confirmed that their predecessors, relatives or past tenants, had already mentioned the mysterious old man.

Father Saul’s dwelling covered a rather vast territory.

If anyone chanced to go through the door that opened onto the street with him, they would find themselves in a sort of garden bordered by tall walls, in which weeds, fruit trees and clumps of laurel bushes grew higgledy-piggledy, in complete disorder. It was a delectable refuge for the neighborhood birds, who could build their nests in complete safety, in this tiny virgin forest.

The house stood against the wall. It was a house that dated back more than 50 years, with a single floor and a roof of bricks, that had once been red but had turned brown over the seasons. The windows, which looked out over the garden were rigorously decorated with thick, impassible iron bars.

A small, low door provided access to the interior of the house and once someone went through it they found themselves in a modest bedroom, which resembled a monk’s cell. A wrought-iron bed occupied one of the corners of the room; the walls, which had once been white, had taken on a grey hue. In the middle of the room, there was a rough wood table and opposite the bed there was a plain washstand.

That was where the tall old man, known as Father Saiil, slept.

There was another room in the tiny house. It had been set up as a laboratory. It contained retorts, crucibles, multicolored sheets, and an enormous fireplace that was constantly lit on

which liquids and odd pastes bubbled, giving off violently bitter odors.

In one corner of this laboratory, there was a heap of dirt, mixed with pebbles and elsewhere there were blocks of raw coal that seemed to come directly from the mine.

Most days, and occasionally at night, Saul spent his time in his laboratory where the eccentric man took part in his mysterious work.

The enigmatic hermit’s only companion was a tame owl, who perched on an old cupboard, motionless and with its eyes closed, looking as if it were stuffed.

That day, at about four o’clock in the afternoon, someone had seen old Saul walking down Rue des Irlandais and returning home at a pace that was faster than usual. Once he had entered the house, the strange man had locked his door, with more care than usual. Then, he had taken out a series of newspapers from one of the pockets of his long, threadbare overcoat, spread them over the table in his laboratory and started to read them with feverish anxiety.

Yet, the old man did not read all of the pages. His glance stopped on a short paragraph, always the same one, placed on the second page of most of the newspapers.

And this article, which Saul read over and over, without seeming to grow tired or it, said:

Academy of Science

After studying the agenda, the learned members assembled read an anonymous communication which, while initially seeming to come from some hoaxster, contained such claims that a decision was made to ask this far too discreet correspondent, through the newspapers, to identify himself and to provide greater details about the invention he claims to have made.

This was followed by details about the invention which consisted, according to the anonymous correspondent of the Academy of Science, in the discovery of the means to artificially manufacture gold. An old man, a foreigner, living in Sainte-Genevieve, had apparently found an absolute, definitive and certain means for manufacturing the precious metal!

Old Saiil read this item over and over. After 30 minutes, he looked up. His face was livid and large drops of sweat pearled on his temples.

He clasped his head in his hands and murmured, “Through the powerful Buddha who presides over the fate of humanity, I believe that, after reading this item, a frightful act of betrayal has just been committed! Who could have revealed the secret of the project I have been working on for close to 40 years and which just now I am convinced I have completed?

Lord, protect me and keep the most fearful of cataclysms from falling on my head, which is already bowed toward the tomb, before I have been able to fulfill the sacred duty that was inspired by heaven where our ancestors dwell?”

Then the old man cut the articles that had so deeply disturbed him out of the newspapers, pinned them all together and placed them in a drawer.

And, without a doubt, he found this hiding place not safe enough since he removed them from that drawer and placed them in a chest hidden under the furnace in his laboratory.

After hesitating for a few moments, Saul took them out of the chest and finally placed them in the pocket of his long, threadbare overcoat, murmuring, “That’s where they will be hidden the best since that is where I can keep a close eye on them.”

Saiil cocked his head, believing that he had heard distant noises, but then felt reassured.

He muttered, “Perhaps this doesn’t concern me, but someone else was studying the same problem. Did he find the solution? The discovery is much farther away than the anonymous author of this news item claims. And if I only had the resources that could be produced by the artificial manufacture of gold to accomplish my work, I believe that we wouldn’t have to wait much longer before the legitimate emperor climbs onto the throne of his ancestors!”

As he uttered these strange words, Saiil walked into a neighboring cabinet and raised a trap door in the floor, revealing the top of a small wooden staircase with worm-eaten steps.

He went down into the dark hole and, after a few moments, reached a cellar. Saiil flipped an electric switch.

The basement he had just entered lit up. He did not widen his eyes; he did not move s single muscle of his face since the old man was certainly used to seeing the inside of this basement.

Anyone who had found themselves in this basement with the old man for the first time would have been dumbfounded, frozen with emotion. The sight was extraordinary. The entire cellar was filled with crates. The lids were raised, revealing innumerable quantities of gold pieces. They were certainly worth millions and millions.

Yet, was this real gold or the artificial gold the old man had just mentioned?

Someone who had examined the precious content of these crates would soon be convinced that they contained absolutely authentic pieces of gold, which came from various countries: French louis d’or, 30 mark coins, pounds sterling, Italian, Austrian, Russian and American coins.

The old man walked over to one of the crates and, with a trembling hand, lifted a few of the gold ingots, then stood up suddenly and shuddered.

A bell rang twice in the distance. Saiil immediately realized that someone was ringing at the door to the house.

Why twice?

Saiil quickly climbed back up the stairs that led to his laboratory. He quickly walked through the room that held his bed. The old man took a sort of bulky white robe from a cupboard and threw it over his shoulders. Dressed in this manner, he went to the garden door and, before opening, glanced through the peephole.

On Rue Monge, one of those old houses destined to disappear under the sledgehammers of the demolishers, is occupied by an entire colony of shady vagabonds, for the most part Algerians, Arabs, wretches who had escaped from traveling circuses or freak shows and who, staying in Paris while their families remained far away, make an effort to live in the capital city by taking part in subtle, fishy businesses.

They work as Oriental carpet merchants who, once summer comes, transform into sellers of exotic fruits. Occasionally, they play the accordion or hire on as extras in the suburban dance halls. Jacks of all trades, but masters of none.

This Asian colony lives on Rue Monge in sordid attics at the end of dark, greasy corridors.

Brawls are frequent there, thefts common. And the few strangers who stray into these filthy buildings under the pretext of looking for low-cost hotels leave after losing almost all of their money and their clothing, without knowing who perpetrated such thefts.

On the third floor of this hovel, in a room, the most beautiful one in the entire building, there was a man with an energetic and authoritarian silhouette, with a robust and vigorous body.

He was in shirt-sleeves and, standing in front of a mirror, he was darkening his face with an oily paste. Then he glued short, black sideburns to his cheeks and placed a wig made of long ebony hair, carefully braided, on his head.

Anyone who would have seen this individual, this extraordinary character, put on a long, black silk robe, buttoned on the front from bottom to top and cinched in at the waist by a large silk belt, would have initially believed that the man was some sort of Hindu, some sort of Oriental who had not yet renounced the traditions of his country.

When seeing the individual disguised in that manner, they would never have guessed his true identity, would never have been able to unmask him with a glance.

Yet, someone could have performed this miracle. Someone could have discovered the true personality of this so-called Oriental, simply by noting the dark gleam of his eyes, simply by observing the sardonic and authoritarian grimace of his thin, well-drawn lips. That someone was Juve since the so-called Oriental man with the browned skin was none other than Fantomas!

An extraordinary thing occurred while old Saul was hurrying to his home on Rue des Irlandais. At the very same time, Fantomas was in the hotel room on Rue Monge, completing his make-up.

Newspapers were spread over a red velvet sofa, the filled part of the room, the same newspaper that old Saiil had read. Fantomas had even used a blue crayon to mark the passage concerning the Academy of Science, which the hermit on Rue des Irlandais had found so disturbing!

After completing his make-up and putting on his extraordinary disguise, Fantomas wasted no time in the hovel on Rue Monge. He walked down the stairs, encountering, in the narrow and dark, labyrinth-like corridors, a few Arabs on their way to work. These Arabs, who were used to all possible and imaginable outfits, paid no attention to the tenant who was heading out wearing a silk robe like those worn by Orientals.

Fantomas stepped into the street, walking along with the crowd without the slightest concern. With a mocking smile, he looked at the police officers, absolutely certain than none of them, as they saw him go on his way, imagined that this representative of the yellow race, with his woman’s clothing, and his long hair tied in a bun under a soft hat, was none other than the elusive, powerful bandit whose name alone made crowds shiver.

Fantomas reached Rue du Cardinal-Lemoine and was walking slowly up the slope when suddenly an ironic smile lit up his face.

Two men were walking toward him, walking nonchalantly in the middle of the sidewalk. Two men with a military look. Fantomas recognized them without displaying the slightest trace of emotion: they were police inspectors, two of the most loyal subordinates of his indomitable adversary, Juve.

The officers were none other than Leon and Michel.

They walked past Fantomas without for a single moment suspecting the man’s identity. They had barely glanced at his attire, barely smiled as they elbowed their way past.

Suddenly, the dauntless Fantomas had an idea. He wanted to push his audacity to the limit. He stopped suddenly, retraced his steps, and walked toward the two men, who had also stopped, glancing at the Oriental man, or at least the man they considered to be Asian. They did not dare continue on their way since the foreigner was approaching them.

“Excuse me, gentlemen!" Fantomas said, pretending to be amiable and humble, while camouflaging the distinctive sound of his tragic voice. “Could you tell me the way to Rue des Irlandais?”

Leon and Michel looked at one another. They were not familiar with Rue des Irlandais, but a sergeant was passing nearby and they waved at him. The peace officer ran over immediately. He knew the two Surete inspectors and cast a suspicious glance at the man talking to them. The peace officer thought he was being required to make an observation about the foreigner.

“It’s a man,” he said. “But he’s dressed like a woman!”

But Michel immediately defended the foreigner.

“It’s not a disguise officer. You can clearly see that the man comes from Indochina!”

Fantomas corrected Michel, with a smile, “From India, gentlemen. It’s not at all the same thing!”

“I beg your pardon,” Michel said, embarrassed.

Then Leon, interrupted, asking the patrolman, “You’re from around here, tell this gentleman where he can find Rue des Irlandais.”

But the officer had only started working in that neighborhood the day before and he spent five minutes looking through a small agenda, which Fantomas, losing his patience, grabbed from his hands. Finally, the terrible bandit discovered what he needed on his own, something which was relatively easy for him since he knew perfectly well where Rue des Irlandais was located. He thanked the officer as well as the two gentlemen, turned away from them, and set out on his way up Rue du Cardinal-Lemoine.

Fantomas found his little prank quite amusing.

“If Juve plans to work with lads like that to take me down, I do think that I’ll be free for a rather long time!”

Suddenly he frowned.

“And those hours are essential for me,” he continued. “I need them to complete the work I’ve undertaken.”

“Gold... gold... I need a lot of gold! My reserves from Mexico are considerable, but they are not enough and I need more of that precious metal which will enable me to do whatever I want. For 40 years now, the hermit on Rue des Irlandais, who goes by the name of Saiil, has been conducting experiments which I have not been able to follow as closely as I would have liked. I must know what he’s managed to do, and if my suppositions have come true. Has he found the means to make gold artificially? I doubt it! But I am certain that he has considerable reserves at his disposal. However, it will be difficult for me to take all of his reserves since he cannot have it all locked away in his basement. He must have other hiding places and I must find out where they are!”

Ten minutes later, Fantomas stood in front of the door at 29 Rue des Irlandais. He rang twice and waited.

That’s when old Saiil had arrived and had glanced through the people in the door at the visitor who wanted to enter his home.

On the other side of the door, Fantomas’ face appeared through the people. Saul looked at the stranger with a certain amount of trepidation.

Slowly, Fantomas uttered a single word, “Bedjapur!”

Saiil immediately uttered a cry of surprise and opened the door wide.

“Come into my home,” he said, trembling. “Come in, you who know the name of Bedjapur.”

Once the door had closed behind him, Fantomas bowed low to the ground, raising his arms over his head, stammering in an attitude of infinite respect.

“Sahib! Sahib! The way to your home has been long and hard!”

Old Saiil replied, “I live alone, out of the way, and no one in this western city suspects who I really am. And you, who are you? Why have you come to disturb the silence of my abode?”

Fantomas stood up and stared at the old man.

His glare was so unwavering that Saiil grew disconcerted and asked in a quavering voice, “By the great Buddha and his Brahmin princes, tell me who you are, where you come from and what you want to know.”

Fantomas objected, saying “This garden open to the winds, this parlor of nature which has no ceiling other than the sky and the clumps of trees for walls, is not a good place for the discreet conversation I must have with you, Bedjapur!”

Once again, as he heard that name, the old man quivered.

“Come in!” he said to Fantomas.

And this time, instead of taking him into the cell-like bedroom or the laboratory, which reeked of chemicals, old Saiil brought his visitor into a third room which they entered through a door hidden in the wall.

This room was very different from the others. It was rectangular in shape and had a glass ceiling. There was no other window and all of the light came from above. The walls were covered with rich fabrics and skins of wild beasts. It was furnished in an Oriental style. Small stools, with mother of pearl inlays, were placed randomly around the room. At the back, there was a platform. Three steps covered with red carpet led up to a chair that looked like a throne.

Knowing that his visitor was following him at a respectful distance, Saiil walked to the back of the room and sat down on the throne. He bent low for a few seconds and, his face hidden by his hands, he said “Buddha is with us” three times.

He bent low again, closed his eyes and, looking at his visitor who had remained motionless in the room, he declared, “Speak, you who has discovered my hiding place, speak and tell me where you come from and what you want.”

Fantomas, who was no doubt familiar with Oriental traditions, bowed three times to old Saiil, who was sitting on the throne, then crouched down on the ground, took a deep breath, and said, “Later, we will write on the parchments that relate the history of our peoples, the history which has been transformed over time into legend. The day after the frightful repression of the Indian people by the English torturers, a very young child from the royal family and the last vestige of the heirs to the throne, managed to escape and went to live in the wild in the Gange forests... Bedjapur was his name.”

“Surrounded by faithful Brahmins and fakirs with rapturous eyes, this young child quickly grew into great beauty, strength and wisdom and learned to hate the English and love his mother land, India. First, at the age of 20, when the vigor of a young man’s muscles occasionally abused the reasoning of the mind, Bedjapur wanted to raise a revolt against the invader and allow the Hindu people to become once again their own masters. But traitors sold his secret to the English and a price was placed on the head of Bedjapur, who had already been vanquished before the battle. Bedjapur confined himself to his hiding place, wandering about in the middle of the forests, meditating amount the fakirs, the dervishes and the Brahmins. In the midst of these wise men, inspired by the great Buddha, he learned that one thing was stronger than disciplined armies, more decisive than the power of guns, more energetic than cannon balls... He wasted no time realizing that this thing that mastered the work and all of humanity was none other than gold. As of that date, Bedjapur realized that, if India were to become free or if India were to cast off the yoke of England, he needed to accumulate gold and more gold... to the point that the treasures of Golconda would be as nothing compared to the treasures of Bedjapur!”

As Fantomas was speaking, tears rolled down the bony, wrinkled face of the tall old man on the throne.

In an emotion-filled voice, Saiil, or at least the extraordinary person hiding behind that name, stammered, “Stranger, what you say is true. That was how Bedjapur thought. But how do you know that?"

Then Fantomas stretched out on the floor, his nose in the dust and in a skillfully camouflaged voice, intended to give the impression that he was touched to the very depths of his soul, he murmured, “I know that, Bedjapur, because I am one of those who are honored to be fakirs. I know that, Bedjapur, because I am no stranger, but your disciple, your subject! I know that because your brothers along the Gange entrusted me with a mission to come and find you in your hideaway, and to ask you when the great deed will be done, when the blessed day will arrive when you will return to the throne of your ancestors, when your throne will be returned to those to whom it belongs.”

“Unfortunately,” interrupted the old man, “my ancestors are no longer among those protected by Buddha and already my descendants have been called to the celestial paradise. I am alone...”

Fantomas interrupted, “Was it not said, Bedjapur, that if your son is dead it was not without posterity and that he left, a few years ago, not yet far in the past, when the war was being fought on the soil of South Africa, an heir, or better yet and heiress...”

Fantomas paused.

“Stop,” shouted the old man. “Those are mysterious things that must not be mentioned out loud! Can we be sure that the walls have no ears? And the secret must not at any price be revealed to those who are interested in knowing it and who would then do everything in their power to kill the one, she who must...”

The old man did not complete his sentence. Fantomas had stood up and, suddenly changing tone, he said, “Bedjapur, you are right and such words will never be uttered among us again. Time is short... Did you read in the newspapers the item about the discovery of artificial gold that seems to refer to you?”

“My son,” replied the old man. “It seems that they were referring to me. Could you tell me who wrote that biased and ignoble article?”

A slight small flickered over the bandit’s lips. Was it not interesting that he, Fantomas was being asked that question since he was the one who had sent the anonymous note to the newspapers precisely in order to upset the man he had come to see?

Fantomas took on a hypocritical air and said, “Unfortunately, I don’t know who wrote that article, but what is essential for me, your disciple, your subject, is knowing, right now for certain, whether you know the secret for making gold?”

Saiil, or better yet Bedjapur, stared at Fantomas.

“Why do you ask that question?”

“In the interest of the people of India. Do you trust me or not?”

The old man thought for a moment and then replied, “I must trust you, so I will tell you. For forty years, I’ve believed that I was on the point of discovering that formidable secret, but I must admit that I don’t know the entire secret.”

“So,” Fantomas said in a disappointed tone. “You have nothing?”

“Yes, I do,” declared Bedjapur. “I have lots of gold in my cellars.”

“That’s nothing!” said Fantomas.

“I have even more in various distant hiding places,” Bedjapur continued.

“So little,” said the bandit, disparagingly.

“I even have gold in the safest banks of the great European nations!" Bedjapur insisted.

This time, Fantomas said nothing and merely shrugged.

“All that gold combined will not be enough!" he finally said. “The most insignificant sovereign, the smallest republic could accumulate more gold in 48 hours that you can provide after looking for it your entire life.”

“Unfortunately, what can I do?” replied the old man.

“You were supposed to discover the means for making gold,” Fantomas grumbled imperiously, gradually losing his humble and respectful attitude.

Bedjapur shivered. Then he seemed to recover from his fleeting dejection.

“I tell you!" he said. “I have been looking for the means for over 40 years and I am on the point of discovering it. In a short while, perhaps tomorrow, perhaps later, in a few years...”

Fantomas banged on a stool that was inlaid with white shells, causing Bedjapur to jump in fear.

And, while the old man was growing concerned over the other man’s attitude, Fantomas roared, “Tomorrow, you will lie dead next to your pitiful supply of gold and all of India will wait, crushed, oppressed under the English yoke! Is that why you call yourself Bedjapur and why you spent twenty years of your youth living with the fakirs, Brahmins and dervishes, who were counting on you like people count on someone that Buddha has marked with his majestic and immortal finger?”

The old man wrung his hands and sobbed loudly.

“Unfortunately, unfortunately! I have spent my entire life searching, fighting... I have dedicated my mind to the science which I took for my mistress. And now I am approaching the decline of my life and I still haven’t succeeded!”

Fantomas interrupted, “Bedjapur, I have something better than the secret you are looking for. You are looking for a way to make gold. Child’s play! I tell you, I have something better than that!”

The old man had left his throne. On wobbly legs, he approached Fantomas as if he were fascinated by his piercing gaze.

“Speak!” he begged. “What have you found?”

He fell to his knees before Fantomas, beseeching the other man.

“Speak! Speak!” he insisted. “Now, I’m afraid I will die before...”

Then, Fantomas stood up tall and, taking on a respectful air once again, he looked down to speak to Bedjapur, almost murmuring in his ear,

“I have come to bring you the most formidable secret imaginable. I know how to make artificial diamonds! In eight days, you will be the richest man in the world... The man whose wealth will surpass the combined wealth of all the rich people in the universe... But for that to happen, I will need a great deal of your gold in exchange for that secret.”

Bedjapur’s eyes shone brightly.

“If what you are telling me is true, my son, my gold is yours...”



CHAPTER XII - A Serious Trail



On the banks of the Seine, between the Pont de la Concorde and the Pont de l’Alma, a man walked quickly, following the shore of the river.

He was trotting, bent over. His large hob-nailed shoes stumbled over the uneven cobblestones along the shore. He carried a bag on his back which seemed to be filled with something that was constantly moving.

The man had a hairy face, a bushy white beard. He grumbled as he walked, swearing furiously, although he smiled broadly.

It was none other than the tramp Bouzille.

Bouzille was being followed, from the Point de la Concorde, by a young man who walked quickly behind him. When that man approached the tramp, he placed his hand on Bouzille’s shoulder, who cried out in surprise.

“Hey! Help! Someone is trying to kill me! I assure you, officers, I have done nothing! No, no, no I’m not carrying a body in my bag!”

Then he stopped short and turned back to look at the person who had just hit him on the shoulder.

“Mr. Fandor,” Bouzille said, bursting out laughing.

It was, in fact, the journalist who had caught up with the hilarious tramp.

Fandor seemed to be in a very bad mood. He frowned as he looked at Mere Toulouche’s husband, examining him from head to foot without saying a word.

Ever since the famous day when he had been so extraordinarily captured by Fantomas and had been obliged, like the other unfortunates caught in the net that fell from the top of Feeric City, to hand over his wallet to the thieves working for Fantomas, without complaining, without saying a word, so as not to reveal who he was, Jerome Fandor, had been furious.

First, he had been terribly concerned over the fate of his beloved Helene who had been injured during the tragic evening at the Folies-

Francaises. Fortunately, he had been quickly reassured about the condition of the woman to whom he had given his heart, Helene was safe in a small, discreet and comfortable hospice and was recovering rapidly.

That meant that Fandor could act without worrying and set out on his occasionally dangerous searches and wandering, without having to worry that the woman he loved was taking her share of the risks and difficulties.

Fandor was not only furious, but also desperate, considering the turn of events. There was no hiding the fact that Fantomas’ acts were growing more and more phenomenal.

Up to this point, the bandit had acted alone or at least in the shadows. He had not declared his power openly and was not afraid, in order to avoid some formidable collision, to turn heel and order his accomplices to flee, to give up the game, and come back another day.

But now, no doubt because he had managed to escape the incessant pursuit of the police for many long years, Fantomas seemed determined to fight face to face with the authorities.

The men who took orders from the bandit were no longer accomplices, they were a veritable troupe, an army, directed by the crime general.

Only the regular police force stood against him and Fantomas, no doubt intoxicated by his successes, did not worry himself about treating the senior officers of the Surete as equals, and sending declarations of war to his adversaries at the Quai des Orfevres, making all of them tremble in fear.

The situation had reached such a point that Juve constantly kept coming up with the most extraordinary and audacious plans to capture Fantomas while Fandor had only one goal in life: to track the comings and goings of the criminal mastermind’s accomplices and capture them in order to reach the one who was so truly elusive.

For several days, since the event at Feeric City, Juve and Fandor had been hard at work.

Juve was preparing well thought out, formidable battle plans. At the Surete he was organizing a special team that would be responsible solely for Fantomas and for bringing his reign of terror to an end once and for all.

At the same time, Fandor was trying to clarify certain problems. He wanted to determine the secret and mysterious bonds that united Fantomas’ accomplices. He wanted to shed some light on the extraordinary matter of the hens that everyone was talking about. Fandor, with his natural perspicacity had moreover come to the conclusion that, under the circumstances, it was important to play a close game. He had the feeling that the absurd tale of the chickens was actually a serious matter and it was important for him to find out just what was going on.

But Fandor felt that, in order to do that, the greatest precautions were necessary and that he had to avoid looking like he suspected the people he might interrogate. Then, Fandor told himself that those who had the chickens in their possession included both the true accomplices of Fantomas and certain naive individuals who had the chickens without suspecting that they would serve the interests of the sinister bandit.

One of those caring for chickens was Bouzille.

Fandor had learned that under memorable circumstances, but he had not been able to determine the exact role played by the old tramp in the affair.

Bouzille was, as usual, neither fish nor fowl, an accomplice of Fantomas yet not an accomplice, informed about some of the bandit’s intentions, but not others.

Fandor needed to determine the truth but he had to do so without revealing his concerns to the old tramp.

After approaching Bouzille, furious, his face dark and his expression concerned, Fandor suddenly smiled and started to laugh along with Bouzille.

“Here you are, old crab!” he said. “I’ve been looking for you for an hour.”

“Really!" said Bouzille. “Why?"

Fandor took a cigarette case out of his pocket.

“To offer you a gift."

“Yeah!" said Bouzille, trying to look clever, “I guess you’ve got time to waste! Well, I’d like to believe you. So, where are you headed now?”

“To take a stroll with you," said Fandor, taking the old man by the arm.

“But I’m of no interest..."

“Quite right!" said Fandor. “I wanted to apologize to you for the trouble I caused you when I discovered you in the Moriss column with the theater posters. It is true that you caused me to make quite a serious mistake, after all, by indicating that it was the poster for the Menus-

Plaisirs that Fantomas was interested in, while it was really...”

Bouzille interrupted, “That's fine! That’s fine. Let’s not talk about it anymore. I thought I was doing the right thing. It’s not my fault...And, for the rest, I’ve been punished!”

“Really?” asked Fandor.

“Yes,” continued Bouzille. “I’ve been kicked out.”

“Who did that?”

The tramp stood up straight and uttered, “The City of Paris. My landlord.”

Fandor didn’t understand right off, then suddenly the light shone in his mind.

“Well, that is true. You were living in the

Morris column on the boulevard, which belongs to the city. My compliments, Bouzille. That’s really something, living in the City’s buildings. My contacts don’t extend beyond the police prefect and the manager of public assistance!”

Bouzille sighed, saying “The sweepers kicked me out and I’ve had to move...”

He pointed to his bag and added, “See, I’ve got my belongings in my bag. It contains a bedroom, the living room, the kitchen, some gardening tools and a few pets...”

“What do you mean by pets?” asked Fandor. “Good grief! It’s Josephine!” Bouzille replied. “Josephine!” Fandor repeated.

“Do you understand!" Bouzille whispered. “Josephine is the hen, Mere Toulouche’s hen...”

“Ah, that’s true” said Fandor. “And how is the old thing doing?”

“Always the same,” said Bouzille. “A bit worse for the wear today than yesterday and more tomorrow than today, as a famous poet said. She works hard until noon and after that she rests until the next morning... a nice gift to give a young man, isn’t she? And to think that I’ve joined forces with a woman like that! There’s nothing like it!”

“But you’re still living the single life,” observed Fandor.

“Sure thing!” replied Bouzille. “And I’d prefer to die..?

He stopped talking.

As he had been talking, two men had climbed onto the docks and were walking toward the vast esplanade that stood next to the Pont d’lena. In that area, work was in progress on the large cast iron conduits that stretched under the roadway. Bouzille walked closer to them.

“Well, Mr. Fandor,” he said, pointing at the enormous cylinders. “Here’s my new address. “When you want to see me, you might just find me in one of these pipes. I’m moving in here.”

It was about five o’clock in the evening. Twilight was falling, the docks were deserted and Bouzille, after making sure that there was no peace officer nearby, vigorously threw his bag into one of the pipes.

“Well!" he said, giving Fandor a furtive glance. “The move is over. As you can see, it’s long and not at all expensive.”

Bouzille’s bag, however was jiggling about and the chicken’s plaintiff clucking could be heard. She did not seem to enjoy being locked up with the unlikely utensils the old tramp used for furniture.

“That damned Josephine!” Bouzille said. “You have no idea how demanding she can be. There’s just no way to keep her quiet. I constantly have to take care of her, to take her for walks... She’s almost more work than a woman. If she keeps on this way, I’m going to wring her neck. Either that or give her back to Mere Toulouche!”

Upon hearing that name, Fandor shivered. He would have liked to find out where Mere Toulouche was staying, yet Bouzille said nothing about that.

Fandor asked him, “So, where is the old dear staying?”

The tramp flapped his arms, his eyes grew murky and he replied, “How am I supposed to know? Bouzille goes his way and Mere Toulouche goes hers.”

Fandor realized that he would get nothing out of the old tramp.

“Strange!” he muttered as he left the old man, who had retired into his pipe and was arranging his things.

The night passed peacefully and quietly on the deserted docks. The peace officers, who had been attracted by the snoring that came from the pipes that had been placed on the roadway, had discovered an old man sleeping soundly inside the pipes. But they had not felt the need to chase him off and had merely instructed him to move on, without taking care to make sure that he did as ordered.

After noting that the pipes had a lodger, they had gone on their way, failing to note that one of the thickest banks in the Trocadero garden also had an inhabitant, one who did not snore and who remained quite alert, on the look-out, spying on everything that occurred.

That inhabitant was none other than Fandor who, marvelously disguised as a ragman so that he could go anywhere without being noticed, at least during the early hours of the morning, had sworn to watch Bouzille.

Fandor was starting to despair that the old tramp would ever move when, at five o’clock in the morning, he clambered out of his cast iron Pipe-

Bouzille picked up his bag but, no doubt as a precautionary measure so as not to break its wings, he held the chicken, the famous chicken under his arm.

Fandor thought, “If he’ carrying all of his belongings, that means he’s moving again.”

Bouzille head over toward the Passey bridge. Fandor followed him at a distance.

They walked for a good half hour, crossed the Seine and took the left bank. They reached the yarding track that ran along the river where large flat rail cars, loaded with all kinds of waste, stood perpetually.

A filthy being, a shapeless woman, appeared to stand at the peak of the heaps of waste, furiously and frantically searching through it.

It was Mere Toulouche. The journalist had recognized her at a distance and started to take greater precautions in his efforts to find out what was going on.

He was anxious since he had always suspected that, while Bouzille maintained contact with the elderly criminal woman, she was most certainly in constant contact with Fantomas and that by following each of these accomplices, one after another, he would finally uncover their secrets and locate the hideout of the sinister bandit and find the den of the elusive genius.

Bouzille walked over to Mere Toulouche. Fandor took the opportunity to hide under an empty rail car located next to the one Mere Toulouche was searching.

And from there, without being seen or heard, he could see and hear what was going on.

Mere Toulouche, holding a hook in her hand that she occasionally used to scratch her head, had seen Bouzille coming and yelled at him, “You piece of rubbish! Drunk again!”

Bouzille shook his tangled head.

“No!” he replied. “Haven’t even had a drop this morning!”

Mere Toulouche placed her hands on her hips and cried out in a hoarse voice, “Are you bringing the hen back?”

“Yes,” said Bouzille.

He opened the piece of clothing that served as a vest for him. The chicken could be heard clucking as she tried to escape. She tore herself away from the tramp, flapped her wings and landed on the ground, unable to go any further since her foot was caught in a piece of rope that was tied to the button on Bouzille’s pants.

“Gently, gently, Josephine,” he called. “You mustn’t run off like that!”

And, since the hen was pulling on the string and clucking with all her might, Bouzille looked at Mere Toulouche and said, “It’s unfortunate, isn’t it? Such a lack of gratitude. I’ve been looking after her for eight days now and all she wants to do is escape. Like all women.”

“When you’ve finished insulting the entire better sex...” Toulouche said, as she stood up. “We have all the rights since we’re the better-looking ones.”

Bouzille grumbled!" That remains to be seen. Some samples aren’t so bad, but others...”

Mere Toulouche did not insist.

“That makes no difference!" she said. “You were called here to return the chicken so hand it over!”

“I’d like to,” replied Bouzille. “But who’s going to pay me for taking care of the chicken?”

Mere Toulouche had not expected the question.

“At least twenty cents per day.”

“Twenty cents per day!” repeated Mere Toulouche. “That’s robbery!”

“Well, ten then,” suggested Bouzille.

Toulouche replied in an authoritarian voice, “Hand over the hen and I’ll pay you a liter of aramon.”

Bouzille did not ask to be begged and, with great satisfaction, he got rid of the chicken for a few coins, which Mere Toulouche generously handed him.

“Farewell, Josephine” he called out. “Ill drink a toast to your health!”

Yet, he did not leave. Before leaving, he wanted to satisfy his curiosity.

“Any news about our buddies?”

“No news,” she said.

Yet, after a moment’s silence, she added, “Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf have no woman.”

“I know,” said Bouzille, with an understanding expression. “Adele moved up... she sleeps in silk now.”

“Yes,” added Mere Toulouche. “She’s moving up.”

Bouzille shrugged and said, “That’s a problem for Bee and Oeil. What will they do?”

Toulouche grumbled, “People always make do in situations like that. They’re looking for another woman. That’s what they’re doing.”

A few seconds passed and, hesitantly, Bouzille asked, “And what are you going to do with the chickens?”

In a dry voice, Toulouche declared, “If anyone asks you about that you say you don’t know.”

And the conversation ended as a result of Toulouche’s unwillingness to answer Bouzille’s questions

She had not moved from the top of her heap of garbage and Bouzille had remained down below, on the shore and, in order to converse, the pair had to shout. They were unconcerned about this, thinking they were alone. They had no idea Fandor was there and could hear them.

Bouzille had been gone ten minutes when Mere Toulouche, who had gone back to searching through her pile of garbage, had looked around, making sure no one was spying on her, and pulled a large wicker basket, in which she had hidden a half dozen hens, out of the rubbish.

She hurried to add the hen Bouzille had returned to her to the cage. Josephine mingled with her sisters, who were crammed in the cage, and Toulouche decided to carry them all off.

Fandor’s heart was pounding.

He felt that Mere Toulouche knew a great deal about the mysterious story of the hens.

Mere Toulouche must have been put in charge not only of placing the hens in the hands of the various individuals but also getting them back at a given point in time and gathering them all together.

But it was necessary to know why.

While Fandor remained under the rail car, observing what was going on, Mere Toulouche walked over to the Quai de Javel and waited for a carriage to dive by.

The elderly shrew hailed an old carriage, harnessed to a thin horse and driven by an enormous man. As she climbed into the carriage, someone jumped onto the rear springs. It was Fandor.

“Oh!” exclaimed the journalist. “This is getting more and more interesting. Mere Toulouche is transporting her hens in a carriage. This must mean something.”

The carriage drove through Grand-Montrouge and Paris. It proceeded past Grenelle, Vaugirard and on to Montrouge, crossing the barrier.

The trip lasted about an hour and fifteen minutes.

Fandor thought, “This is going to end badly. This trip will cost at least three francs and 50 centimes and Mere Toulouche will never want to pay that.”

The carriage headed toward Chatillon. The driver did not seem to be familiar with his route, yet the kind, brave man, wanting no doubt to finish his race, asked passersby for directions.

The carriage proceeded and Fandor, who had decided he no longer needed to hang from the springs or to face behind the carriage, held back a few yards and that’s how he learned what address Mere Toulouche had given: the Impasse du Moulin.

The Impasse du Moulin was a filthy alley in the middle of unspeakable, tumbledown cottages.

The driver brought the carriage to a stop, saying “I won’t go any farther. The road is too bad. Give me my money. You’ve reached your destination, old woman.”

The poor driver looked worried about having let himself get dragged into such a sordid place. Obviously, he expected a discussion with his client, who had just jumped out of the carriage with some difficulty and placed her basket filled with chickens on the sidewalk next to her.

“That will be four francs forty-five!" the driver said, holding out a calloused hand and looking at Mere Toulouche, eyes filled with suspicion.

Yet, the coachman's face suddenly lit up. A beautiful five-franc coin had just fallen into the palm of his hand.

He quickly hid it in his fob pocket, saying, “That will be four francs forty-five without the tip!”

Then he asked Mere Toulouche, “Do you want the change?"

“No,” the old woman said, generously, “Keep the rest.”

This time, Mere Toulouche had earned the title of madam.

After turning his carriage around, the driver respectfully said, “Thank you madam. And good luck. Good day to you!”

He drove off, cracking his whip. Mere Toulouche stayed there alone with her chicken s a few yards from the Impasse du Moulin.

Fandor had just enough time to hide behind a half-open door. Someone was coming to meet the old woman and the journalist felt his heart pound when he saw that person in the distance.

Who was that man?

Mere Toulouche greeted him in a booming voice, “Good day Mathurin!”

And the man replied in the nasal, singsong accent of the Normans, “Good day to you, old woman. Are we going to enjoy some excellent poultry today?”

Pointing at her basket, Mere Toulouche replied, “In case you decided to be generous, Pere Mathurin, it would be possible to sell them to you at a good price, while earning a living.”

Fandor was flabbergasted by this conversation. Who were they putting on this show for and what was behind these meaningless words?

Fandor said to himself, “I imagine that Mere Toulouche has no more intention of selling her hens than that so-called Pere Mathurin has of buying them!”

Fandor did not dare move. Yet, from behind the door, where he was hidden, he realized that there were a few passersby in the street.

“That show was for them,” thought Fandor. “Well, things are getting more and more complicated. But what the devil is going on in that terrible street? Is he surrounded by accomplices? Is he alone? That’s what I must find out!”

And who was Fandor thinking about when he uttered those words and who was the person he saw disguised as a Norman peasant? Obviously, it had not taken him long to reach a conclusion.

The journalist, in fact, had only looked at the man for a third of a second, but based on his posture and above all his expression, which he had seen for a moment, he had drawn his conclusions.

Fandor, although he was worried about being surprised, was excessively pleased that he had decided to follow Mere Toulouche to the Impasse du Moulin since Fandor was convinced that the man who had joined Mere Toulouche, the fake Norman peasant with the nasal voice, was none other than the sinister bandit that Fandor had been tracking for such a long time.

Pere Mathurin was none other than Fantomas!

Mere Toulouche and the man did not remain in the middle of the alley for long. They walked a few yards down the alley and from there nothing else could be heard.

Fandor stood still for a few moments, then raced off.

He did not wish to be caught, or discovered but, above all, he didn't wish to lose sight of the old woman, to remain alert in this neighborhood. Prepared to catch the criminal in one of his many transformations, to locate his hide-out before intervening and to finally arrest the man once and for all.

Just as Juve had promised himself, Fandor had sworn not to act prematurely, not to get involved in a direct fight with Fantomas, once he had obtained all of the information he needed to arrest the bandit and his accomplices.

Fandor spent the entire day exploring the vicinity of the Impasse du Moulin. It was located at one end of Chatillon, in the lower part of the village and extended down to the fields worked by the small farmers. A small thicket of trees lined a brook that flowed, a few yards from there, to mingle with the underground waters of the Bievre.

The Impasse du Moulin was made up of low houses surrounded by small gardens which must have once been small farms but which now served as housing for the population of shady wretches and loafers usually found in the area.

Since that morning, Fandor had not glimpsed either Mere Toulouche or the so-called Pere

Mathurin or even the chickens carried by Bouzille’s spouse.

Yet, the journalist was convinced that those mysterious individuals had not left the Impasse and decided to continue his observations until he could catch them in the act.

Fandor, who had purchased something to eat from a local wine merchant, was preparing to spend the night on a roof overlooking the Impasse du Moulin when, as night fell, he suddenly shuddered.

A door to one of the oldest cottages in the Impasse had opened. A man stepped out, dressed as a peasant, carrying a cage filled with chickens.

That man was none other than Fantomas. He slowly walked out of the Impasse du Moulin.

This time, Fandor felt like leaping on the monster, shooting him with his revolver. Yet, as he set out in pursuit, three or four men stepped out of the shadows, all dressed like peasants, and walked over to the bandit and surrounded him.

Fandor recognized the familiar silhouettes. Oeil-de-Boeuf was there, along with the tall Bec-de-Gaz. Fat Louis was there; he was a newcomer to the gang and already enjoyed a formidable

reputation for his ferociousness.

Fandor felt all alone in the middle of all these bandits. It would have been mad to intervene, to declare war. His defeat would have been guaranteed. It was not the right time. But, he could still follow them and discover what they were up to.

Fandor put his revolver back into his pocket and followed the group of wretches surrounding Fantomas, at a distance.



CHAPTER XIII - An Extraordinary Performance



From that moment, Fandor, alone against the gang headed by Fantomas, engaged in a complicated, frantic pursuit.

Certainly, the men accompanying the sinister bandit did not suspect that they were being followed. Otherwise, there would have been twenty opportunities for one of them to rush Fandor and assassinate him without that poor man having time to put up the slightest resistance.

But the journalist, trained by Juve, was a master in the art of hiding when following someone.

Moreover, the circumstances were in his favor. The ragman’s disguise, which he had donned the previous day, just by chance, and which made him look like shabby, allowed him to pass unnoticed, particularly in a neighborhood like Montrouge, where he was at this time, a neighborhood that was more popular than elegant and where prowlers were legion.

Moreover, given the falling night and the fact that the poor light cast by the gaslights favored Fandor, no one who approached him or crossed his path would have been able to recognize him without paying particular attention.

Finally, Fantomas and his men were most certainly preoccupied and not paying much attention to the mysterious person who was following them.

The small gang of fake peasants entered Paris through the Montrouge door, then split into three groups.

Fandor was fortunate in that he had identified the vehicle Fantomas had climbed into. He was also extremely satisfied to find a taxi which he ordered to follow Fantomas’ vehicle at a distance.

Fandor was both astonished and angered by the bandit’s extraordinary indifference and insolent audacity.

While the entire police force was concerned about Fantomas, worrying about where he was, while the Surete agents in Paris and the provinces were once again distributing a detailed and precise description of him, accompanied no doubt by rewards offered to anyone who managed to capture him, Fantomas was indifferent to all that, strolling about Paris as he saw fit, peacefully continuing all of his usual activities, organizing thefts, planning his crimes!

Fantomas’ colleagues, jammed into carriages, had instructed their drivers: “Take us to Les Halles!”

Yet, the vehicle in which the bandit had settled was instructed merely to follow the others. Fandor’s taxi brought up in the rear, some distance from Fantomas’ vehicle, which the journalist took pains to keep in sight.

They arrived at Rue Monge and Fantomas’ vehicle stopped at the door of a disreputable looking hotel for a few seconds. The bandit got out and rushed into the building.

The vehicle immediately continued on its way, so rapidly that, for a few seconds, Fandor questioned what he had seen.

“Am I seeing things?” he wondered, as he saw the carriage in which Fantomas had been sitting just a few minutes earlier, realizing that it had lost its sensational client.

The journalist instructed his taxi to stop, inviting the drive to part it at the edge of the opposite sidewalk. Then Fandor, perplexed, took up his post behind a newspaper kiosk, facing the hotel on Rue Monge.

“By Jove!” the journalist said to himself. “I do believe he went into the hotel, yet I can’t be sure. What should I do! Should I wait?”

Fandor decided there was only one thing he could do: stay where he was.

What else could he do, after all?

Of course, his chances of encountering Fantomas had been compromised, yet that was not the only card in his hand. And he should keep that in mind.

An hour passed. Fandor was starting to despair when suddenly, through the door to the Hotel on

Rue Monge, which he had seen numerous, shifty-looking carpet sellers go through, there suddenly appeared an individual with a bizarre silhouette that caught Fandor’s attention.

The man, with a very brown face, was wearing some sort of silk robe, much like those worn by the Hindus or the Annamites. His hair, as long as that of a woman, was plaited around his head, forming a sort of turban.

“Yet another foreigner. This hotel is filled with them.”

And he would have let that individual walk off, without thinking about following him, if the man had not been carrying a large package that caused Fandor to cry out in surprise.

“The cage with the chickens!" the journalist shouted in his mind.

Of course, Fandor was leagues from believing that the man walking away from him, heading toward Rue du Cardinal-Lemoine, was none other than Fantomas!

The man was so marvelously made up that it would be totally impossible for anyone, even someone who was informed, to recognize the man.

Fandor had the impression that his path was separating in two, that he had come to a fork in his shadowing.

“On the one hand," he said. “Fantomas was no doubt hidden in the hotel. On the other, there is the man with the chickens. Should I follow him? Should I wait for Fantomas to come out? What do I know?”

Yet, time was running out.

Fandor took a 20-franc coin from his pocket. And, as he usually did when he had to make a decision, he tossed the coin into the air.

“Heads I stay. Tails I run after the man with the chickens...”

A metallic clink on the sidewalk announced the landing of the coin.

Fandor rushed over to it.

“Heads!” he said. “In other words, I stay here...” He hesitated for a second, then picking up his coin, pulling his hat down over his head, he rushed over to his taxi.

“Follow that man!” he said, pointing at the individual walking toward Rue du Cardinal-Lemoine.

Fandor had done the exact opposite of what fate had advised him to do.

At the top of Rue du Cardinal-Lemoine, as he reached an area where there was little hustle and bustle, deciding that his taxi’s insistence on following the man on foot could well cause him to be noticed, he got rid of the carriage.

Once again, Fandor let the man get a head start and followed him at a distance of a hundred yards.

The man walked into narrow alleys. Fandor followed him.

“This is truly extraordinary!" he murmured. “What are all these people doing carting cages of chickens throughout Paris and what do those hens mean? Are they a rallying sign? Are they some mysterious alphabet that enables accomplices to recognize one another? Are they hens that lay golden eggs? Why are they being handled with such care? I mean, I’ve been looking into this matter for eight days and I’ve yet to discover anything!”

But, that evening, Fandor would move from surprise to surprise. First, he observed something that suddenly caused his heart to pound. The random twists and turns of his tracking had led him into the vicinity of Rue d’Ulm, precisely where the small hospice where Helene was recuperating was located.

Anguished, he wondered if Fantomas and his gang might possibly intend to attack his unfortunate wife yet again, his unfortunate wife who, in Fantomas’ eyes, had committed no crime other than falling in love with him, Fandor.

With that thought, he clenched his fists, blood flowed to his brain and Fandor said, “If they want Helene, then I’ll stand in their way.”

He had felt overwhelmed since the previous evening, having had no time to sleep, and he was ready for anything.

At the idea that his fiancee, his wife, was in danger, all of his energy returned. The journalist felt driven by a new ardor. He turned into the narrow and deserted Rue des Irlandais, following the mysterious man wearing the long robe. Both men walked close to the walls, hiding in the shadows.

Suddenly, Fandor cried out in surprise, as if the ground had opened up beneath him, swallowing him up. The man carrying the cage filled with chickens, and the cage itself, had suddenly disappeared!

“Good grief!” said Fandor. “Yet, it’s not as if there is some kind of trap door in the sidewalk!”

Fandor did not believe that but he did nevertheless look at the sidewalk, the adjacent road, and felt the manhole cover just to make sure that everything was rigorously immobile.

Then he looked up, slapped himself on the forehead and said, “I’m such an imbecile ”

In front of him, in the wall, there was a door and, with logical reasoning, Fandor said, “By Jove! That where our man went in. They must have been waiting for him, the door must have been ajar when he arrived and, now he’s inside while I’m out here. Well!”

The journalist stepped back.

He was in less of a rush now. He examined the surrounding area and, glancing at a section of a low wall, opposite where the man with the chickens had disappeared, he realized that wall along the street was also the wall for a house that looked over the idle land or gardens that lay behind the wall.

Fandor noticed that it was a very low house with no opening on the street and that the brick roof barely reached one yard above the wall.

The journalist quickly came to a decision.

“I must get into that house and find out what is going on there!’

Although the decision was easy to make, it was more complicated to put it into effect.

And for close to a quarter of an hour, Fandor paced up and down Rue des Irlandais, looking for the place where the man wearing the long robe had entered the building, while trying to go unnoticed and make sure he could retreat in the event of danger.

Fortunately, there was no one else in the deserted street to bother Fandor.

Using a gaslight, he managed to pull himself up to the top of the wall and sit astride it. Fandor, whose eyes had grown used to the twilight, noticed, despite the dark night, that the street was on one side of the wall while a relatively large garden, very dense, lay on the other and, in front of him there was a house, leaning against the wall, the shack covered with tiles, as he had imagined it from down below, in the street, after seeing only part of it.

Fandor did not hesitate.

“That’s it!" he said. “The man with the chickens entered that shack.”

He moved ahead, reaching the brick roof. He stretched out his entire length on that roof and shamelessly yet cautiously started to remove the tiles in order to determine if it would be possible to enter the upper rooms of the house.

But he was unable to move the tiles without making noise and, two or three times, when a tile would fall, he shuddered.

“Good grief!” he grumbled. “I hope no one notices that I’m in the process of demolishing the house!”

Regretfully, the journalist resolved to abandon his dangerous undertaking.

“Poor principle, poor result!" he said to himself. “Let’s try something else!”

At the end of the house, there was a large chimney. Fandor made his way over to it. Deliberately, the journalist bent down over the opening and, immediately froze in surprise, shivering with joy. He heard people talking, voices rising up the chimney to him. He listened, overcome with an unspeakable emotion.

The words Fandor heard were extraordinary, stupefying. It seemed as if he were involved in some ridiculous adventure, as he had suddenly been transported a thousand leagues away from France. An odor of amber and salt wafted up to him, mingled with the scent of chlorine and hot iodine. Then he heard a metallic, foreign-sounding voice murmur strange things.

“My son,” said the voice. “Buddha has finally answered my prayers and, thanks to you, we will possess the rarest treasure in the world, the treasure that will give us infinite wealth, namely freedom for us and ours... Believe in the rod of Bedjapur. When death arrives soon to perform the fatal work on your poor body, your soul will fly to the seventh heaven and take its place among those who accompany Buddha, next to the worthiest Brahmins, fakirs and dervishes!”

“What is he going on about?” stammered Fandor, dumbfounded. “What have I stumbled into?”

He continued to listen. And this time his face tensed and his eyes grew wide with emotion.

A voice answered, filled with respect, “Bedjapur! Bedjapur! Your words are too beautiful for someone as unworthy as me. You are most certainly offending Buddha, by letting me hope that one day, in the eternity of the centuries, his august glance will fall on my miserable soul. But what importance is the reward? That’s not what I’m waiting for. If I serve your cause, which is my cause, I do so only to fulfill the duty that belongs to all of us, the pariahs, the Hindus, England’s victims, the children of India, bruised and detested by the enemies of the West!”

“Well, well,” Fandor stammered. “This surprises me more than I could ever imagine. There’s nothing to be said for it, the man who is talking, the man who is replying to that so-called Bedjapur, I recognize his voice. I know who it is... Of course, he’s changed his tone and is expressing himself in a language in which is not familiar to him, but I recognize him anyway... It’s Fantomas! What can this mean? What comedy is being played out in this shack? Who is the man he is deceiving? Is it Bedjapur? Is it the man in the long robe? Is it me?”

The journalist listened again but the speakers must have gone into another room since he could no longer hear them.

Fandor, desperate, was about to leave the chimney when the voices rang out again.

Fantomas said, “Bedjapur, Bedjapur. Here are the divine birds I thought I must bring to you. You can check the truth of my words yourself. You can make sure that, using the technique I have developed, the vile food consumed by these chickens can be transformed and is transformed within a few hours, and takes on the nature and consistency of the most precious mineral in the world!”

Bedjapur’s strident voice interrupted Fantomas, saying, “You’ve found a means to make artificial diamonds! May Buddha bless you!”

Despite his anxiety, despite his concerns, Fandor could not hold back a burst of laughter which, despite his efforts, rang out through the chimney pipe.

Good grief! This was worse than anything Fantomas had done before. He had convinced the other man that he had found a way to make artificial diamonds and would give the old man his secret!

“Ah!” thought Fandor. “If Fantomas had actually discovered such a secret he would never tell anyone else about it!”

Then he heard the sinister bandit’s voice, making an insinuating and gentle suggestion, “Bedjapur, Bedjapur. Soon, when you are alone in this laboratory, you will be able to check the accuracy of my claims. In exchange, as I said earlier, you must help me now. I am poor and wretched. I have many debts. And now that you know how to make diamonds, you who have all the chemical products needed for that, give me some gold in return... give me the reward you promised me.”

“I expected that," thought Fandor.

And he waited, curious, to hear Bedjapur’s answer.

“In the cellars," the old man said, “The cellars that can be reached through a trap door that I will explain to you, there are crates filled with gold coins. In that place alone, there is more than

10 million. Tomorrow morning, you will go into those cellars and take the crates you want.”

Thank you, Sahib,” said Fantomas, stammering his farewells.

Silence fell.

At the top of his perch, Fandor waited a few minutes more, ear bent to the chimney opening, then he looked around, resolved to leap down on Fantomas, in the event that he saw the bandit leave the house.

From one moment to the next, the journalist expected to see the tragic and well-known silhouette of the bandit, make its way along a wall, or standing in the frame of the door on the street.

He was prepared to leap down on the other man, revolver in hand.

Ten minutes passed, then fifteen. Fandor heard a slight sound, a silhouette, a shadow was slipping through the garden, disappearing into the thickets of the small park, too quickly to be followed.

Yet, Fandor was not filled with regret. It was not Fantomas he had seen go on his way, but the man in the large silk robe who was disappearing alone, without the cage of chickens.

Yet, Fandor had not identified this man as Fantomas, presuming that the bandit had remained in the house.

Suddenly, he returned to the opening of the chimney, where a pale light rose. He bent over the opening and was dumbfounded. The interior of the chimney was lit by some sort of electric lamp down below and, once his eyes had grown accustomed to the intense light, Fandor understood the exact nature of the fireplace that stood beneath the chimney.

The fireplace was no ordinary fireplace but a sort of brick workbench, on which all kinds of jars, test tubes and retorts stood.

Initially intrigued by this vision, Fandor recalled the words Fantomas had uttered, “Bedjapur, when you are alone in this laboratory...”

And Fandor immediately realized that the chimney he was looking down, was the chimney for the laboratory and that the fireplace was one of the furnaces in the workroom.

Bitter, unpleasant odors rose with the light to Fandor, who had to cover his nose with a handkerchief. Although his eyes suffered from the too intense light, the journalist paid that no heed, focused as he was on seeing what was happening.

Suddenly he heard chickens clucking, not the normal clucking of a peaceful creature, one that was resting, but the hasty clucking of fearful chickens, chickens that were being chased and frightened.

Fandor suddenly witnessed an extraordinary spectacle. Two hands appeared, two very brown, emaciated hands. They held a large black hen that was struggling. Two small wooden vices lay within reach. The two hands, for which no body could be seen, immobilized the unfortunate beast in the vices.

Both hands withdrew and one of them returned, armed with a knife. Suddenly, the chicken was sliced open the entire length of its body. Blood sputtered everywhere while the viscous entrails slowly disappeared into the feathers. The knife was tossed onto the bricks of the furnace and the two hands plunged, without loathing, into the gasping body of the unfortunate beast, carefully searching through the intestines.

Suddenly, a hoarse cry rang out just as a bright shiny object appeared through the perforate gizzard.

Dumbfounded, Fandor uttered a single, “Diamond!”

It was, in fact, a superb diamond, flashing with a thousand lights, that the mysterious hands had extracted from the chicken’s gizzard.

“Oh!” said Fandor. “Would Fantomas’ prediction come true? Would precious stones now be found in the stomachs of chickens?”

The remnants of the dismembered chicken disappeared, removed by the two agile hands and thrown no doubt into some waste bin. The instruments of torture, the two wooden vices, tinted red, remained victim-free for a minute and then another chicken, more robust, more beautiful than the previous one, took the place of the first...

It too was carved in two. Its blackish blood spurted every which way. The brown hands, covered with blood, dug through the creature’s innards. Then two hoarse cries rang out as the emaciated fingers of the mysterious hands pulled out two diamonds!

Fandor did not weary of the extraordinary spectacle. After the two hens were sacrificed, there was an intermission during he heard nothing more. Then, two hours later, three more chickens were sacrificed, each giving the mysterious hands two diamonds.

Fandor remained there, panting, immobile. He was starting to understand Fantomas’ interest in caring for the extraordinarily prolific chickens so carefully, chickens who were much better than the chicken who laid golden eggs, since they laid diamond ones.

Day was dawning and Fandor was still on the roof of the small house. Yet there had been no more sacrifices for some time and the laboratory inside had returned to silence and darkness.

“I have to leave,” Fandor thought, as he used the gaslight positioned against the house, to quickly climb back down to the sidewalk.

At about nine that morning, Fandor left the small hospice where Helene was convalescing.

After leaving the strange dwelling on Rue des Irlandais, the journalist, who was very upset, very emotional, had gone to see the young woman.

Initially, not wanting to upset her, the young man had tried to avoid telling her what he had been up to. But, noticing that he was tired, noting his torn clothing, Helene had grown worried and he had been forced to tell her everything.

And Fandor, who was been terribly upset by the extraordinary discovery he had made wanted nothing more than to talk about it. Yet, when he uttered the name of Bedjapur, Helene had suddenly grown pale, so pale that Fandor had thought she was about to faint.

She reacted immediately. Swamping the journalist with questions, she made him tell her exactly where the mysterious house that man lived in was located.

Fandor, surprised by her curiosity, questioned her, saying “Why? Why, Helene are you so interested in this Bedjapur, a man neither of us knows, a man whose name you are hearing for the first time?”

Helene did not listen to him.

She sat up in her chaise longue, eyes shining as if with a fever and stammered, “Bedjapur! Bedjapur! My God! Could it be possible! After such a long time, I thought I would not be capable of retaining that memory. What a strange coincidence! What a strange adventure! Oh, I'm starting to remember now. Could it possibly be true? Was Laetitia right?”

At the sound of that name, Fandor shuddered.^

“Laetitia! Who was close to him and yet far away at the same time. Laetitia! That was the name of the old Negro woman who, in the past, in South Africa, had kidnapped Helene and whom Fandor had encountered when he met the young woman.

Laetitia knew the mystery of Helene’s birth. She was going to reveal it to the two young people when Fantomas, suddenly appeared and killed the unfortunate woman, no doubt to keep her from talking.

When Helene uttered the name of Laetitia, Fandor recalled all of the mysteries surrounding the skull he had discovered, and Juve had taken, in the ossuary of the diamond cutting shop that belonged to Hans Elders. An extraordinary skull, in fact, that had served as a hiding place for parchments that could have documented Helene’s origins, if anyone had been able to read the most unusual language in which they had been written.

Ah! The fights and battles that had taken place between Fantomas, Juve and Fandor, over Helene's famous papers. Each of them had taken possession of the papers in turn and then they had finally remained in Juve’s hands and, as of that time, no one seemed to have any interest in deciphering them. And, a few years ago, one man could have had something to say about that and that was Gerard. But Gerard was dead, assassinated by Fantomas.

Why did the name of Bedjapur bring this mysterious memory back to Helene?

For a moment, Fandor thought his curiosity was about to be satisfied. Helene, recovering from her initial emotion, motioned him to move closer and took his hand in hers.

“Listen, Fandor,” the young girl murmured, panting since she was still quite weak, overwhelmed by fatigue and emotion. “I’ll tell you what I know about Bedjapur. One day, when I was just a little girl, there, in Natal...”

But Helene stopped talking and Fandor did not dare interrupt her. The young girl was obviously exhausted and had fallen into a deep sleep.

That was when Fandor left, postponing his interrogation of the woman he loved more than life, the woman to whom he had promised his soul.

Outside on the sidewalk, Fandor hesitated. First, he had intended to warn the police, to bring the Surete officers back to Bedjapur’s mysterious house and uncover the secret of the man’s existence.

But, after hearing Helene’s words, he hesitated to do that and decided he would not inform the police until after he had listened to what his beloved had to reveal.

Fandor remained perplexed for a moment, then made a sudden decision.

“The building on Rue du Moulin, in Montrouge, is the hideout of a formidable enemy. We must surround it, we must work to capture them all, without wasting another minute, without wasting another second.



CHAPTER XIV - Failed Capture



While these events were taking place along the edges of Rue des Irlandais, in another, more elegant, more fashionable neighborhood in Paris, in the Plaine Monceau area, the wildest incidents and adventures were taking place in a very different setting.

On Rue de Prony, at the house where Adele lived, Adele who was the former servant, the former mistress of Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf, Adele who had by a combination of circumstances and high aspirations, been given an enviable, albeit somewhat immoral, role as a luxurious demimondaine.

Adele’s ascension toward her goal had been so rapid and dizzying that everyone who knew her had remained dumbfounded. She was no less surprised and her sudden promotion seemed to have completely unbalanced the poor girl who was not lacking in intelligence although she had been the simple and modest mistress of two criminals and who, since she had become a woman of luxury seemed incapable of making the slightest rational or logical decision.

Adele had been installed on Rue de Prony by her lover Manoel Palatello, in the superb apartment where he had lived alone prior to that day. Adele was completely overwhelmed, bewildered, or so it seemed, by the enormous amounts of money Manoel Palatello gave her.

This rich South American seemed to enjoy giving his mistress checks all the time, very large checks for that matter, which Adele quickly transformed into bank notes and gold coins.

It was organized chaos in her home...

In vain, Manoel Palatello said to her, “I’ll give you all the money you want, as long as you don’t spend it foolishly, like most of your kind do. Be careful. One day I’ll ask you to account for yourself. If ever I find that you have spent your money foolishly, you’ll see what will happen to you!

Adele paid no attention to the Brazilian’s recommendations.

“When you give me money!" she said, “it’s so I can do what I want with it.”

And then she added, repeating an old philosophical saying often expressed by Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bed-de-Gas, “You can’t take it with you when you die.”

From morning to night, there was a perpetual parade of voracious suppliers, indiscrete beggars, people of all kinds, who wanted to grab their share of the fortune the Brazilian was giving the demimondaine.

Adele, who was a good girl moreover, spent without counting, happy to make the people around her happy, never more delighted than the day on which she spent the largest amount for the least significant thing.

That morning, Adele got up in a bad mood.

It might have been about noon when she woke up, tired, with a heavy head.

The night before, there had been a party at her place and in the parlor, behind closed doors, the atmosphere was heavy, polluted with tobacco and alcohol fumes.

After eating in a fashionable restaurant, Adele and her lover returned to Rue de Prony, followed by a dozen party-goers, both men and women, people that they had met in various places, as they made new friends.

They drank, laughed, dance and sang again and then, at dawn, everyone had left, even Adele’s lover who, having started a game of baccarat with three of his compatriots, had decided it would be interesting to keep on going!

Adele had gone to bed alone, at about four in the morning. She woke at noon, tired and furious. The first words she uttered were violent remarks intended for her servants.

Seeing that their mistress was sleeping, they had not done the least bit of work, particularly, since they had gone to bed late as well. Adele walked through the messy apartment, wearing only a simple peignoir, her hair floating tangled and curled around her head.

The dining room looked like a culinary battlefield filled with empty bottles and leftovers of the meal eaten by the guests of the previous evening.

Adele scolded her valet, “How wretched, leaving all this food out in plain sight! Get on with it! Try to make these bottles and food disappear!”

She walked into the parlor, suffocating in the unbreathable air, then scolded her chambermaid. But that woman declared that the parlor was not her territory, that other servants were responsible for cleaning it.

Adele shrugged, not knowing quite how to respond. She had moved into the position she now held so quickly that she had not quite grown accustomed to giving orders. At some times, her chambermaid was a companion. She was more comfortable with the woman when telling her jokes than when giving orders.

Adele returned to her boudoir. The room was relatively tidy. It was, moreover, Adele’s favorite place, the room she used when she had a few moments to herself, spending her time there to passionately read all the serialized novels she could get her hands on.

Adele rang the bell. She was dying of thirst. A servant appeared.

“Bring me a glass of water!” she shouted.

Yet, as she was waiting, she noticed that, here as well, the housekeeping had been sloppy.

There was an enormous amount of dust on the furniture and cigarette ashes on the armchair where she wanted to sit.

“Drat!” Adele grumbled. “The servants are all in on it. They never do anything. I know something about it, I'm...”

If Adele remembered who she had been, it was not only to say it, but also to prove it to herself. Pushing a sofa with her foot, Adele had just discovered, hidden under it, a feather duster and a cleaning rag and she automatically rolled up the sleeves of her peignoir and wrapped a napkin picked up from the neighboring table around her head to protect her hair and courageously started cleaning her own apartment.

This strenuous exercise chased away the headache that had been pounding at her temples. She breathed more deeply, she felt more and more rested as the violent exercise relaxed her muscles and brought pearls of sweat to her forehead.

When she needed to rest, she went over to the balcony and looked down at the street, without worrying about the attention she was attracting or the comments of the neighbors, who were quite astonished to see an individual living in an apartment that cost 10,000 francs, doing her own housework while her many servants crossed their arms and lolled about in the armchairs in other rooms.

Adele was on the balcony and was taking an interest in a dispute involving a carter and a carriage man when she heard herself being called from inside the apartment. The young woman left her observation post and returned to the boudoir. Manoel Palatello had just arrived. The Brazilian seemed dumbfounded at his mistress’ attire.

“Have you become a servant?” he asked. “Where is the mistress of the house?”

Confused, Adele blushed to the roots of her hair and said, “I just wanted to keep active. It’s my nature... I have to be on the go.”

The Brazilian shrugged. He took a little notebook out of his pocket, wrote something in it, put it back in the pocket and continued his observations, saying “I haven’t been giving you 50,000 francs per week over the past month so that you can do the housework! You simply have to pay people to do that. If you want to keep active, get on a horse, do some physical exercise, learn to dance! In fact, what’s happening with your dancing lessons?”

Adele submissively replied, “I started two days ago... and then I stopped.”

“Why?”

“Because the instructor ran off.”

“Why did he do that?”

“He took a Chinese vase that was on the fireplace mantle. Naturally, he hasn’t been seen since.”

Manoel Palatello sat down in the boudoir.

“You know what I told you, Adele. Spend whatever you want, but spend it well, intelligently. And let me know a bit about what you do with your money.”

Just then, someone knocked at the door.

“Come in,” Adele said.

A servant entered the room.

“It’s the automobile,” he said.

“What automobile,” Adele asked.

“Madam knows full well,” said the servant, respectfully. “Madam ordered an automobile yesterday morning at 10 o’clock. It’s still here and the mechanic is still waiting for orders...”

Adele lost her temper.

“Idiot! You should have notified me! I forgot all about it. I took taxis all afternoon!”

Impassive, the valet continued, “The mechanic is asking to be paid. He wants 300 francs for renting his car. Since yesterday morning, at 8 o’clock.”

Adele searched through a drawer that held a few spare gold coins. She counted out 25 gold louis coins.

“Here,” she said, throwing them at the servant. “Throw these in his face and tell him to clear off!”

Then she turned to Manoel.

“Hey!” she said. “Do you think I know how to do things, that I know how to spend money? Do you like it like this?”

While Adele’s behavior might have seemed a little mad, the Brazilian looked even crazier.

He shrugged.

“It’s absurd,” he finally said. “You were supposed to give the mechanic 300 francs, not 500. The difference is just being thrown out the window.”

The Brazilian took his notebook out of his pocket again, wrote something down, and suddenly ran over to the boudoir door and called the servant back.

“Come back here, you animal,” he shouted.

And, when the valet returned, Manoel Palatello declared, “Go and ask that mechanic what his car is worth. I’m buying it from him!”

And as the valet retired a second time, the Brazilian turned to Adele and said, “Now this is what I call being reasonable. Since a car lasts five or six years on average, no matter how much that man asks for his vehicle, it will most certainly not be 500 francs per day!”

Adele was dumbfounded.

“Well,” she said. “All I can say is that you’ve got a cast iron constitution!”

Manoel Palatello felt that enough had been said on the matter.

“Let's go into the parlor!" he said. “I left some expensive cigars on the table yesterday and I want to see how many are left.”

And as he opened the door that led from the boudoir into the parlor. The Brazilian cried out and suddenly stepped back.

At the same time, hasty clucking sounds rang out and, when she heard them, Adele rushed over to the window and closed it immediately.

“Good grief! The chicken! I had forgotten about it. Drat! If she’s run off, that will be a bad business!”

Suddenly, she appeared quite afraid. The she calmed down, seeing that there was no possible way out for the unfortunate hen.

Yet, the Brazilian, who had been very calm up to that point, suddenly grew furious.

“That chicken should be strangled and thrown outside,” he said. “I don’t want to see it again!”

But this time Adele, who usually gave in to all of her lover’s whims, protested indignantly, saying “Never! It’s important to me!”

“And I don’t want it,” grumbled the Brazilian.

Adele shook her head obstinately.

“Nothing can separate me from it.”

“We’ll see about that,” continued the South American.

And the two lovers, as crazy and mad as they were, suddenly glared at one another, their eyes casting thunderbolts of anger. Manoel Palatello

had picked up his cane and was swirling it about, threatening the hen, whose clucking grew more and more frantic, more and more frequent.

But Adele insisted on thwarting her rich protector. She picked up her feather duster and prepared to defend the hen.

“You won’t have its hide!” she shouted.

And then the threats were followed by blows. An unlikely and grotesque scene took place in the boudoir, concluding with the panic-stricken shrieks of Adele as she was conscientiously beaten by her irascible lover.

This scene, which had just taken place, had also taken place the previous evening and would take place again the next day.

It seemed as if the two extraordinary lovers were mad about battle, and that they could only be satisfied and peaceful after beating one another. The Brazilian generally came out the victor and, after ensuring the defeat of his victim, he would generously throw a handful of gold on the table and go out to play cards yet again.

When he left, Adele knew that she would have a few hours of peace.

That morning, like the others, the battle had taken place. Yet, it had lasted longer and had been more violent. Concerned about the fate of her chicken, Adele had defended herself more rigorously, and responded with more energy.

The shouting, the shrieking, had stirred up the entire neighborhood and the people living upstairs and downstairs had, once again, complained to the police commissioner about the abominable racket made in that house.

It was about two o'clock in the afternoon and Juve was on Boulevard de Courcelles. For several days, the policeman’s comings and goings had been mysterious, hidden. The singular adventures that had taken place in the theatres of Paris, the incidents that had taken place concerning the necklace, did not leave Juve any peace of mind.

The policeman had grown grumpy. He would lock himself up at home for hours, receiving no visitors. Old Jean, who had returned to his post, no longer dared to go into his employer’s office, where Juve sat, his mind filling with dark ideas. The old man was scandalized when he noted that Juve no longer even thought about Fandor.

Juve was walking along Boulevard de Courcelles, when he suddenly called out to two individuals walking in his direction.

“Hey, you there, good evening,” he said.

The individuals stopped, somewhat surprised by this approach. Then, suddenly, as they recognized the police inspector, they ran toward him.

“Well, well, well, Mr. Juve. What a fortuitous encounter. How are you?”

The two men were Nalorgne and Perouzin, two mysterious lads in whom Juve had a little trust, although they were highly accredited as police inspectors and members of the increasingly compact group of Fantomas’ adversaries.

Juve looked at them with a clear and penetrating glance, and asked, “Where are you off to?”

Nalorgne and Perouzin looked at one another before replying, as they always did.

Juve shook them by the arms.

“There’s no point making something up,” he

grumbled. “Tell me where you’re going.”

“Well!" said Nalorgne, “We’re going...”

He stopped, giving Perouzin an opportunity to continue.

“To investigate a demimondaine,” said the latter.

“I know,” said Juve. “You’re going to visit Adele, the former mistress of Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf.”

“Good grief. That’s right!” said Nalorgne, “The neighbors have filed a complaint, about all the racket at her place.”

Perouzin continued, “Seems like it was terrible, that they found an entire menagerie in the apartment.... Some people are saying that they were raising chickens there...”

Juve interrupted the two inspectors. He scribbled a few words on a page that he tore out of his notebook and handed to Nalorgne.

“You’re going to have to go back,” he said. “Give this to your department head and stay quiet. I’ll take your place I’ll conduct the investigation on Rue de Prony!”

A few minutes later, Fantomas’ famous adversary arrived at the demimondaine’s apartment. He asked to see her and he was invited into the lobby and then forgotten there. The room was filled with suppliers, shop boys. People were coming and going in the apartment.

For a few moments, Juve enjoyed watching the chaos then, losing patience since no one was taking care of him, he deliberately walked out of the room and headed into the chambers.

Moreover, he deliberately left the antechamber since he had seen, through a door that lead to a staircase, someone walking up the stairs, someone he definitely did not want to meet.

That someone was a caricature with an unforgettable silhouette.

That someone entered the antechamber just a few seconds after Juve disappeared, was none other than Mere Toulouche whose sensational attire as a costermonger disguised as a clothing seller made everyone present burst into laughter.

Juve, however, had headed on his own into the maze of rooms. He opened several doors randomly, walked through a few empty rooms, and finally reached the boudoir where Adele was nonchalantly lying on a chaise longue, overwhelmed by the beating she had just received.

“Good day!" Juve said as he entered the room.

Adele jumped, saying, “My goodness, you startled me.”

“No problem at all,” replied the policeman.

But just then, Juve shuddered and stepped back.

The hen, Adele’s famous hen, had just appeared from under the sofa, flapping its wings, clucking in fright.

Juve glanced at the chicken, surprised.

“So, it is true, Adele?” he asked. “You’re raising chickens?”

“How do you know about that?” the former maid said, humorously.

“Everyone in the neighborhood is talking about it,” Juve declared. “And that is why I’ve come to see you.”

Adele glanced at Juve, concerned and suspicious.

“Well, it looks like you’ve got time on your hands!” she said. “Is there a law against raising chickens? Well, first of all, I’m not raising chickens, and if I were raising chickens it would be the same thing... Everyone does what they want, don’t they, and curious people should just mind their own business.”

Her opinion was abrupt, categorical and Juve did not insist, realizing that Adele knew her rights and that she would be more than happy to slam the door shut in the policeman’s face.

Juve took another stance.

“My brave little woman,” he said, taking Adele’s hand. “Do you think I care about your chickens? I came to see you and for something completely different. People in the neighborhood are saying that your lover is most brutal with you, that he beats you dreadfully. The neighbors are upset. They’ve complained to the police commissioner. I’ve come here to look into the situation and tell you that we are prepared to protect you against your Brazilian’s brutality.”

Although Juve spoke in a sincere and natural tone of voice, Adele continued to be suspicious.

“Really!” she said. “You’ve taken all this trouble for me! That’s quite nice for the police! When a demimondaine gets hit by her lover or when she hits him back, the most famous and the busiest of all the force’s inspectors drops by. I would never have thought they would do this for me! Really, you’re going to make me blush!”

Adele was mocking him and Juve was fully aware of this.

“She doesn’t want to say anything to me, so she won’t say anything to me,” he thought. “Perfect, I’m going to have to take my gloves off with her.”

The policeman did not respond to the woman’s ironic comments.

“Well,” he said, “looking thrilled. “As long as the situation is no more serious than that, I don’t think there’s any point in disturbing you any longer. You can joke as much as you like, Adele, but I assure you that at the Surete we spare no effort to protect and defend people who are in need. If ever you do have problems, just call me and I’ll run over.”

Juve bowed, smiling at Adele, and she smiled in return.

“Don’t trouble yourself!" he said and he saw that she was preparing to see him out.

And suddenly, the policeman left.

Adele stayed in the room, listening, to make sure that Juve had truly departed.

She was a bit worried.

“Why did he come here?” she wondered. “Of course, it had nothing to do with my fights with Palatello! It must be something else. But what? Good grief, it’s easy enough to see! He wanted information about those chickens. What an idiot! As if I would say anything to him! But it is true that that hen bothers me!”

Adele hesitated for a second. Then she rang the bell. After a few moments, a servant appeared.

“Go and see if the clothing seller has arrived!" Adele ordered.

“What is her name?”

“Her name is Mere Toni...”

Adele stopped talking, then said, “I have no idea. I don’t even know if there is anyone in the antechamber. You’ll be able to recognize her though... she’s the ugliest and tackiest of them all!”

Impassive, the servant withdrew.

Adele murmured to herself, “I just about put my foot in it there. Those stuffed shirts don’t all need to know Mere Toulouche’s name!”

A few minutes later, the mysterious old woman was chatting with Adele in the boudoir.

“You know!" grumbled the demimondaine. “I’m fed up with your hen! You have to take it away from here. It's causing no end of trouble. You always have to keep an eye on it and it could cause some wicked problems. Do you know who just left?”

“No,” said Mere Toulouche.

“Juve!” declared Adele. “And since he didn’t come here to ask me to stick my tongue out so he could see if I was well, I think he may be on the trail of something and that could go badly for us...”

Mere Toulouche assumed an innocent expression.

"Yet there’s no harm in raising chickens in your home.”

“That’s not it,” Adele said suddenly, “You know full well that’s there’s something suspicious about those chickens. Bec-de-Gaz didn’t way what was going on when he gave me the one I have here, the one you gave him for me, but you must know! So, Mere Toulouche, you are going to do me the pleasure of taking this hen away from here. It must be gone from here in five minutes. Otherwise, I’ll go and find Juve and tell him that you gave the chicken to Bec-de-Gaz so that he could give it to me and that it was given to you by...”

Mere Toulouche raised her arms to the sky, saying, “Shut your mouth, pretty one! Shut your mouth. You can't talk like that! First, I said nothing but, since you're having problems, I’ll get rid of the chicken for you!”

Mere Toulouche bent down toward the chair under which the unfortunate hen, half dead with fear, was hiding. The old woman took a few seeds from her pocket, placed them in the hollow of her hand, and called the hen. After hesitating for a few moments, the hen approached. Suddenly, with the skill of a pickpocket, the old woman grabbed the animal, using her gnarled fingers to grab its wings, tied it up quickly and stuffed it in her large bag.

“Fine!" said Adele, who had witnessed the capture. “Now, get out of here!”

Mere Toulouche wasted no time disappearing. She grumbled as she walked down the stairs, “After all, I did the right thing and Fantomas won’t catch me for taking back the hen... all the more so since he’s busy liquidating all those that he was keeping in Impasse du Moulin. Have to belief that his plot worked! I’m certain that he will be quite happy to see this one...”

Mere Toulouche, who decidedly had a lot of money, no doubt as a result of Fantomas’ generosity, took a car and gave the address to the driver: Impasse de Montrouge.

And, someone behind her was taking a taxi, preparing to follow her. That someone was Juve, Juve who instead of leaving Adele’s apartment when he had taken his leave of her, had hidden behind a curtain and overheard the entire conversation between Adele and Mere Toulouche.

Just as Fandor had lain in wait for Fantomas and his accomplices in the Impasse du Moulin the previous evening, Juve, who was pursuing Mere Toulouche, was also about to spy on the comings and goings of the street’s mysterious inhabitants.

After 45 minutes, they both arrived at Montrouge. Juve, who had sent off his car at the same time as Mere Toulouche was getting rid of hers, followed the elderly woman at a distance.

She arrived at Impasse du Moulin, spent half an hour in the tumbledown cottage from which Fantomas had exited the previous evening, then headed off in turn, after locking the door.

Juve let her leave.

He waited for a few moments and then, taking advantage of the fact that there was no one in the vicinity, he walked over to the sordid dump.

After using a skeleton key to get inside, Juve, his revolver in hand, closed the door and carefully examined the room from which Mere Toulouche had just left.

It was a dilapidated house, a sort of absolutely abandoned shack good, or so it seemed, for storing old tools.

There was only one floor and it contained two rooms, with a dirt floor. In one of the rooms, there was a bench, chairs with broken seats and in the other there was a sort of chicken coop, which housed only a single hen, most likely the hen that Mere Toulouche had picked up from Adele.

Juve made a quick tour of the unusual dwelling in which he found himself. He crossed his arms and thought.

“What the devil can be going on here? What is going on in this building?”

There was nothing suspicious about the dump and its insignificant, honest appearance intrigued Juve.

“It’s hiding something.” He thought.

And he wondered if the walls, the large beams for the roof, the chicken cage, were not hiding some secret device, a door, a trap door that led to a basement.

Juve remained on the alert and carefully started to take an inventory of the miserable dwelling, when, all of a sudden, he stopped moving and held his breath.

All around him, he noted unusual sounds, heard strange whispering, observed the characteristic rustling of bodies sliding over a roof, of footsteps surrounding the house.

“Oh!” thought Juve. “Have I fallen into some kind of trap?”

The policeman wondered if Mere Toulouche had perhaps noticed him, if she had drawn him in in order to have him surprised, if she had gone for reinforcements. Juve realized that the deadend street where the house in which he stood was absolutely isolated. Far from any respectable, honest dwelling.

The shanty and the neighborhood provided a marvelous hideout for bandits. Juve shuddered, and tightened his grip on the revolver’s trigger.

“Well,” he grumbled. “If I have to defend myself, then I’ll defend myself. But I’ll have a clear heart and I’ll know who I’m dealing with!”

Juve had no doubt about that. He realized full well that that the shack in which he stood was surrounded.

At places, the walls were made of nothing more than plaster tiles. Juve heard someone walking on the other side and realized at the same time that people were settling on the roof. There was no doubt that he had been discovered, that they realized that he was trapped inside and that they were about to give him a hard time!

Juve backed up against the portion of the wall that appeared the most robust to him, leaned against it, gathered the chairs and tables he found in the room in front of him to make a kind of barricade, then waited.

He did not have long to wait. A whistle rang out outside. Then, at the same time, the wall was shoved in, the door was torn off its hinges, a hole appeared in the roof and a dozen men rushed into the shack, brandishing revolvers and shouting.

“Surrender!”

“Never!” replied Juve.

But his cry died in his throat and he burst out laughing.

The policeman was in familiar territory. Before his every eyes, dumbfounded expressions on their faces, stood the Surete officers. Mr. Havard stood a little to the side. Suddenly, next to Juve, the familiar voice of his friend rang out, “Juve! Juve! Well, well, well...”

The policeman turned his head and shouted,

“Fandor, It’s me!”

Once again, Juve and Fandor met, although both had been expecting to face Fantomas. They looked at one another for a moment, astounded, then walked closer.

“I’ll explain everything to you,” said Fandor, embarrassed.

Juve interrupted him, “I understand. We don’t have a minute to lose!”



CHAPTER XV - Silence!



“Do you really feel better, Miss? Do you need me to accompany you?”

Helene, to whom the nurse was talking, dismissed the woman with a nod of her head.

Yet, the nurse insisted, saying, “You’re still quite pale and, for your first outing into the garden, I think it would be unwise to go alone.

Helene impatiently corrected the nurse, “My good Amelie, I assure you that you are mistaken. First, I am quite hale and hearty. Moreover, this is not my first outing, but my second. Yesterday, I took a stroll in the park, for close to two hours and

I was not in the least fatigued. Quite the contrary.”

“You weren’t alone, madam. A nurse accompanied you.”

“I’m much better today,” Helene said dryly. “And I will rest much better if I walk as I see fit, taking small steps, staying silent. Talking wearies me.”

The nurse did not insist again. She realized that the patient had made a final decision and that this was not a good time to disagree with her. Moreover, although Nurse Amelie had offered her services, she did so more as an effort to exaggerate her duties than out of any real concern about

Helene going into the garden alone.

The patient had almost recovered. It was true that she had taken a long walk in the park the previous day without experiencing any discomfort. And, she had to get used to going back to ordinary life. In three days, if no complications occurred, she was to leave the convalescent home and return to her normal life.

“Go on, then, Miss,” said the nurse who, with a motherly gesture, arrange that shawl that Helene had thrown over her shoulders. “Come back at 4 o’clock for your snack.”

This time, the young woman accepted the nurse’s instructions with a pleasant smile and gracefully and slowly walked down the steps of the small porch at the convalescent home that overlooked the park.

And the name “park” was not overly pompous. The building where Helene had been cared for after her terrible accident had formerly been a hotel and all of the outbuildings had been preserved. In the previous century, that hotel had stood in the midst of vast gardens and wooded areas. Most of the trees had been preserved and the garden had remained intact.

All those who came to the convalescent home were surprised to discover, in the very heart of Paris, a country-like property with lawns, glades and even a small forest and fields of apple trees where a herd of cattle grazed.

The illusion of an immense rural site was enhanced even more by the fact that the facility was not bordered by walls or six-storey buildings, but that it was complemented, on the other side of the palisade, by gardens belonging to other houses.

The previous day, Helene had strolled in the park with a nurse. She had gone there for the first time. The two women had wandered nonchalantly under the trees, looking this way and that, they then had sat at the edge of the park under a type of bower. Since the day had been very hot, the nurse who had accompanied Helene had fallen asleep.

The young woman had not roused the brave nurse whose eyelids were heavy following several sleepless nights and had respected her nap time. Moreover, while the nurse slept, Helene had been kept busy watching a strange and surprising spectacle. Through the fence that separated the garden of the convalescent home from that of a neighboring dwelling, she had watched what was going on at the adjacent property.

And the spectacle had dumbfounded here.

Behind the thick clumps of vegetation that grew randomly in the untilled soil, Helene had seen a majestic old man with dark skin and white hair, walking slowly. He was wearing a white silk robe and waving his arms, as if praying.

Superb chickens flew all around the man, who kept them close at hand by offering them a profusion of seeds contained in a bag that he held in his hand, dipping into it from time to time to satisfy the voracious appetites of the flock.

Helene had been surprised by the strange spectacle of the old man feeding the chickens in the private garden. Moreover, the vision had quickly disappeared.

Then the nurse awoke. When Helene returned to the convalescent home with her attentive guardian, she asked, “Do you know the man who lives in the garden next to this one?”

The nurse looked troubled. “Yes, miss,” she replied. “He’s some kind of madman, a real character at the very least, that we see from time to time in his garden. And what a garden! A veritable virgin forest that has never been touched by a gardener!"

“What is the man’s name?” Helene asked, more to continue the conversation than to satisfy any sense of curiosity.

“He’s called Saul, miss... at least that’s what he says. But I think he’s hiding his real name. He’s a foreigner, an Asian, or so it seems. Moreover, his face is quite brown. He’s been in this neighborhood for forever yet no one seems to know exactly what he does. Some say that he’s a miser, others claim he’s demented, and still others are convinced that he’s some evil-doer who is hiding here.”

Helene returned to her room quite cheered by her stroll. She had passed an excellent night and, at dawn, had been pleasantly surprised by a visit from Jerome Fandor.

But once the journalist left, Helene felt upset, troubled, concerned.

Had Fandor not given her a detailed description of the strange night he has spent on the roof of the house on Rue des Irlandais? Had he not uttered a name that Helene found extremely disturbing? The name of Bedjapur?

Alone, Helene had thought for a long time, extremely agitated.

What a strange coincidence!

The young woman had immediately and easily determined that the old man in the white silk robe who the nurse said was called Saiil, and the mysterious individual described by Fandor were one and the same. Bedjapur.

Bedjapur?

Why did that name mean so much to Helene?

The young woman did not need to confide in anyone. Yet, she got up quickly after Fandor’s departure and, as soon as she had eaten breakfast, she indicated her desire to stroll in the park, to stroll alone in the park.

She finally won out. Helene walked quickly through the shady paths of the large garden.

She did not hesitate. She had a precise goal.

The young woman headed over to the bower from which she had seen the old man and his flock of hens the previous day.

Helene sat down on the bench hidden under the arbor and spent a half hour there, carefully listening.

From one moment to the next, she expected to see the old man appear and, at that idea, her heart pounded.

But the time passed and no one appeared in the neighboring garden.

Helene stood up, quite agitated.

“Yet, I must know!” she said. “Bedjapur... Bedjapur... no, it can’t be possible! Yet, if I dig into my memory, if I evoke the distant memories of my early childhood, if seems that I recall things that are both terrible and comforting.”

The young woman walked along a small path that ran along the wooden palisade that separated the two gardens.

At one point, she stopped. The wooden planks that made up the palisade were broken at that location, as if someone had pushed them over on their way through.

“Good grief! It would be so easy to get to the other side,” said Helene, whose heart had started pounding.

The young woman had no time to think. Spontaneously, her legs carried her to the other side and before she had time to think about what she was doing she was in the neighboring garden.

Helene walked slowly, taking care not to make any noise, avoiding the dead branches that would have cracked under her footsteps. She walked through dense grass, along banks, around bushes, then suddenly stopped.

She had just heard significant sounds coming from a gravel path: footsteps.

The young woman hid behind a clump of laurels. She pushed the branches aside and poked her head out cautiously to get a look, remaining motionless, dumbfounded, her pretty face framed by the leaves.

Helene blushed deeply since she had pushed the branches aside just in front of the person who was walking in her direction, the person she had heard walking.

That person was none other than the old man. He was alone, dressed as he had been the previous day in his large white robe. He wore a large amber necklace that hung down to the middle of his chest; a small ivory elephant that had yellowed over time dangled at the end of the chain.

As Helene observed him, the old man quivered, took a step back, then raised his hands to the sky, dumbfounded, muttering incomprehensible words as he glanced at the graceful apparition.

Suddenly, he bowed down low to the ground, arms outstretched. Then, getting slowly back up, he asked in a melodious voice with a foreign accent, “Who is that peeking out from that bush? What is this human creature that I know, without really knowing, but which I think I have already seen?”

Helene simply apologized, “I beg your pardon, sir. I’m staying at the convalescent home next door and I stepped into your garden just a moment ago without really intending to. Yesterday, I was sitting under the bower facing your property. Perhaps you noticed me?"

But the old man shook his head, while staring at Helene, a strange expression on his face.

“I didn’t see you yesterday,” he said. “But I recognize you anyway, although I have never met you, since there is no doubt a resemblance.”

Suddenly, the old man covered his eyes with his hands, saying “Buddha! Buddha! What new trial are you imposing on your disciple? Is your dedicated servant the victim of some spell?”

The old man recovered his composure and, in a trembling voice, addressed Helene, saying “What is your name? What is your name?”

The young woman was about to give her name when an idea suddenly crossed her mind. Her name was Helene, but was that what they had called her in the past, when she was in Natal with Old Laetitia... No!

At that time, Helene was passing as a young boy. She dressed as a young boy, she looked like one, she was educated as one and, in order to complete the subterfuge, old Laetitia and everyone who knew her had called her Teddy.

“My name is Teddy,” said Helene, staring at the old man in order to see how he would react to that statement.

The effect was extraordinary.

The old man stumbled backward. He would have fallen if the trunk of a nearby tree had not stopped him.

“Teddy! Teddy!" the old man repeated. “No, that can't be! It’s impossible! Yet...”

While the old man was upset, Helene was every bit as emotional. She walked over to him, and clasped the boney fingers of the old man in her hands, staring at him fixedly, eyes filled with questions.

“They call you Saiil, don’t they?” she murmured. “But isn’t your real name Bedjapur?”

The old man jumped again. This time he looked at Helene in fear. His lips trembled. He seemed to want to talk, but the words died in his throat. Finally, after making a supreme effort, the old man recovered some of his composure. He bent toward the young woman, towering over her and in a deep voice he said, “Yes, I am Bedjapur. Who told you that?”

Helene did not want to lie or to recount the mysterious circumstances under which Fandor had told her the old man’s real name. She simply made a vague motion with her hand, then lowered her head, blushing.

The old man was so upset that he did not notice. Suddenly, as if a subtle idea was germinating in his mind. He grasped the young woman’s arm and pulled.

“Come,” he said. “Let’s go inside. Let us hide from the eyes of passersby. Buddha has sent you and I know that now is the time to tell all, to do all... Come in, pure and noble young girl, come into Bedjapur’s home!”

Helene followed the old man, intrigued, curious, and overcome with emotion.

What an extraordinary encounter! What a formidable secret she was about to learn!

Bedjapur was the name of the mystery and emotion that had filled her ears during her very early years, during her early childhood. Before understanding, before reasoning, Helene had been familiar with the name of Bedjapur, a name she knew to respect, to love more than any other in the world.

Then, as she had grown up and old Laetitia, her nurse, had grown old, the name Bedjapur was only spoken rarely and then always with fear, in hushed tones. The name that had once been blessed, that had been repeated over and over, was then banned from usual conversations.

Helene had never dared ask old Laetitia for explanations. Bit by bit, she had forgotten

Bedjapur. Yet, now, suddenly, purely by chance, her thoughts turned to her younger days, her memory returned liked a desiccated plant that is given air and water.

And Helene had the instinctive feeling that there were mysteries in her life, that formidable and shadowy secretes surrounded her origins and her birth. Bedjapur was the key to all of the puzzles and through Bedjapur she could learn everything.

The young woman followed the old man. Walking behind him, she crossed through the humble bedroom, which looked much like a monastic cell. She was surprised by the laboratory, with its clay ovens, its test tubes and the flasks from which bitter odors rose.

Then she stopped, dumbfounded, at the threshold to the large rectangular room, lit only by the glass in the ceiling, its walls covered with rich, exotic fabrics and skins of ferocious wild beasts.

She felt as if she were in one of those Hindu temples which she had read about in books and suddenly Bedjapur appeared taller to her, more dignified, more noble, more solemn!

The old man strode majestically across the room. The sound of his footsteps was muffled by the thick carpet covering the floor.

Then he went to the end of the room and, after climbing up the stairs of the podium, he sat down on the golden throne, as he had done the previous day when Fantomas, disguised as a fakir, had come to offer him the means for making diamonds.

Bedjapur motioned to Helene to sit at his feet. And, raising his arms to the sky while hanging his hands toward the ground, he beseeched Buddha in the sacred language of the Brahmins.

When he had finished, the old man looked at the young woman.

“The time has come,” he said. “Listen! Almost forty years ago, Bedjapur, who had miraculously escaped from the ferocious English who were oppressing India, was picked up by poor Indians and raised as the son of a poor man, despite the fact that he was a king. A king! He spent his childhood in poverty, his early years working, but his career is perhaps crowned by the triumph of his dynasty... After studying the history of men and people for a long time, Bedjapur realized that, in order to shake off the yoke, powder that blows up thrones and rivers of blood are of no use unless they are backed by gold coins that calm passions and support legitimate struggles. So Bedjapur came to study, in the very heart of Western civilization, the sciences that would enable him to learn how to make gold. He was on the verge of succeeding, yesterday. Yet, his discovery had not been completed when the shadow of betrayal swept over his books and his work. And Bedjapur was about to despair when Buddha, taking pity on him, sent him an emissary, a fakir who had come to give Bedjapur an even better means for liberating oppressed India than making artificial gold. The fakir gave Bedjapur the means to make diamonds, as many diamonds as he wants!”

Dazed, Helene listened to this strange speech. But the old man did not notice her dismay. He had opened a chest placed next to him. Helene glanced at it and cried out in admiration.

The interior of the chest was carpeted with stars that sparkled with a thousand flames, in the dark room. Diamonds of all sizes lay in the chest, sparkling with extraordinary purity.

As he looked at the treasure, the old man who had been so dignified and solemn up to that point, seemed overcome with madness.

He uttered hoarse cries. He smiled sardonically. He plunged his hands into the chest and let the diamonds flow through his fingers.

“Look!” he shouted. “Look! This fortune is immense and I can increase it at will, since all of these diamonds are artificial. They cost nothing to produce!”

Suddenly, the old man got up from his throne, ran to his laboratory and came back, brandishing a hen in one hand and a long knife in the other.

As Helene watched, he sliced the chicken in two and, paying no attention to the spurting blood, he dug through the creature’s entrails. He looked anxious for a moment, then suddenly cried out triumphantly.

“Look!” he shrieked. “Look! Yet another diamond...”

He picked a superb, sparkling gem from the entrails of the beast, despite the blood that soiled his hands.

Then, the old man suddenly stopped shouting, his enthusiasm waning.

“Yet,” he said, “Why does a pure diamond need to be covered with this red flow, the bloody flow that soils everything!”

He threw the body of the hen aside and tossed the diamond into the chest, wiping his hands on his white robe.

He turned back to Helene and in a voice tinged with madness, said, “This treasure, mingled with blood, represents the history of the oppressed, of those who revolted, the heroic deeds and the betrayals. While Bedjapur, the old man, the man on whose head close to a hundred winters had snowed, was always an honest man and the hero of duty, the same cannot be said for his descendants! One son was born, named Sandyck, an unworthy son, a despicable son, who sold the secret intentions of his father to the race of the oppressors, the English! Sandyck is dead, but he left a child behind. That child was to be sacrificed by Bedjapur, but Buddha did not permit that. Dedicated servants kidnapped Sandyck’s child, removing it from the just fury of its ancestor and the child was sent far away, to distant lands, where Bedjapur could not join it. Bedjapur had no news for a long time but then, bit by bit, because everyone knows everything here, he learned that the child of his son, that the heir of the infamous Sandyck, was a girl, who must now be a woman. Sandyck had married a marvelously beautiful European woman and Buddha did not want the child to look like her unworthy father, but like her noble mother. Like you, she had golden hair that framed her delicate and pure face. Like you she had pale, deep eyes, she had...”

The old man suddenly stopped, while Helene, who was quite pale and trembling, listened to the man speak, hands clasped to her bosom. Her heart was pounding.

The old man suddenly stopped as a mysterious voice rang out.

“Silence”

The old man turned around and climbed back up to his throne. He sat down, astonished by this interruption, seeing no one nearby who could have spoken.

“Who dares interrupt Bedjapur...” he said.

He stopped again.

The voice rang out stronger, more imperious than before.

“Silence!”

Thunder roared and then nothing could be heard but Helene panting as she lay crumpled on the floor.

The young girl was overwhelmed with emotion.

“Bedjapur! Bedjapur!” she stammered. “In the name of heaven, continue with what you were saying... Who was that child? What was her mother’s name?”

Just then, Helene’s eyes grew wide. Although the young woman wanted to get up, she remained motionless, on her knees, as if paralyzed with emotion.

A terrifying, extraordinary spectacle took place before her eyes.

The large golden curtain behind Bedjapur’s throne opened and a terrifying silhouette appeared. It was that of a man, dressed in black from head to foot, face hidden by a mask. He wore a large, black felt hat pulled down over his forehead. A long knife gleamed in his black gloved hand.

The old man, however, had seen nothing, heard nothing, Bedjapur seemed to have forgotten the order he had just been give and started to respond to Helene’s question.

“You want to know the name of the child,” he said. “You want to know who Bedjapur’s heir is and the name of the person who may legitimately replace him on the throne of the empire of the Indias, which belongs to his dynasty. Listen to the name of that women whose father was unworthy but whose mother deserves everyone’s respect. It’s...”

Once again, the order rang out, booming, sarcastic.

“Silence!”

This time, Helene understood.

The silhouette that had appeared behind Bedjapur’s throne was that of Fantomas and the man giving the order to stop talking was also Fantomas.

It seemed that Bedjapur was not about to obey.

His lips opened to proclaim the name Helene was waiting to hear so anxiously. But, instead of that name, a terrible cry rang and a death rattle rose from the old man’s chest.

As fast as lightning, faster than a thought, Fantomas’ knife stabbed into Bedjapur’s chest, plunging deep inside, straight into his heart.

Bedjapur sighed and his arms flapped. The old man’s head bent forward and he remained hunched over his throne, motionless, dead...

A cry rang out, followed by a dull thud.

Terrified, Helene had collapsed on the floor, unconscious.



CHAPTER XVI - The Reconstituted Necklace



“Another one!” shouted Fantomas, who rushed behind the throne, throwing the large black coat he had been wearing, as usual, over his unfortunate victim.

Fantomas had not even spared a glance of pity for the unfortunate old man he had just assassinated.

His joy at having killed him, his satisfaction at getting rid of a wretch he no doubt considered an adversary, an enemy, was pitted against the emotion, the sadness, he felt at seeing Helene, Fandor’s fiancee, the journalist’s wife, the same

Helene that Fantomas had loved, with a sincere paternal love for such a long time, lying on the floor, inanimate, just a few steps away.

The sinister bandit walked over to her, and looked down at her for a long time.

She was even more beautiful than ever, a pale, immobile statue. Her fine features, resting, seemed regular, classic, admirable. Yet, when he saw her so pale, so still, Fantomas was overcome with emotion.

“It’s as if she's dead...” he murmured.

And, for possibly the first time in many, many years, since the time when Fantomas had stepped out of the shadows and into the spotlight and fame created by his misdeeds and his crimes, for the first time Fantomas saw the tragic image of death, fatal, inflexible, take shape, the death that, despite human willpower strikes randomly, choosing its victims, death into whose arms everyone is drawn, one after another, pulled by an invincible force from which they can never escape.

He sighed as he looked at Helene.

“I love her like a father,” he murmured. “I would have done anything to make her happy, if she had wanted me to. Unfortunately, she has constantly pushed me away. Ha!”

Furtively, Fantomas wiped a tear from his eye.

“It was inevitable,” he added. “And how can I ask someone who, despite everything, is not of my blood, to regard me with affection, like those who look at their fathers. Because I am the one who is despised, detested...”

He stopped for a second, then continued talking in a quavering voice, “But I am also the one who is feared, the one whose anger terrifies, whose vengeance sows fear! Come on! Come on! Fantomas, show no sign of weakness, no sentimentality! Continue your work of destruction, vengeance and hatred. Continue! You didn’t start so that you could later retreat!”

He bent over the young girl and looked at her, eyes filled with tenderness.

“Her?” he wondered. “No, no, she must be spared, she must live! I want to see her happy!

Never, never will I touch a single hair on her head!”

“If I killed Bedjapur, it was not solely to steal his wealth, to take his name, his title his privileges, it was also and above all to keep him from talking, to keep him from telling Helene about her mysterious and sensational origins... Already, Laetitia, who was able to speak, died under my blows, followed by Gerard, who I caused to disappear just in time. Bedjapur was the only keeper of the formidable secret of Helene’s birth!”

The bandit chortled wildly.

He raised his fist against an imaginary adversary and shouted, “Juve, Juve, from now on you can keep the indecipherable parchment you stole from me, the birth documents for Helene, who passed for the daughter of Fantomas for such a long time. Bedjapur’s lips are sealed forever and no one in the world will be able to find the key that will reveal the text written on those famous sheets of parchment. Keep them, Juve! I have no need for them!”

The bandit turned his head and his eyes, filled with lust, stopped at the chest filled with diamonds, sparkling like flames in the shadows.

Fantomas was about to rush over to the treasure and fill his pockets with it, but a deep sigh caused shivers to run up and down his spine.

It came from Helene who was still unconscious.

“The unfortunate girl! The poor child!” Fantomas murmured.

Then, suddenly, he rushed over to her, picked her up in his arms and carried her outside.

“She can’t wake up here! Fantomas said. “I don’t want to have to give her any explanations.... And if she were to see me at her side, after seeing me kill Bedjapur, her hatred and disdain for me would only increase....”

Carrying his precious burden, Fantomas left the room in which the tragic drama, Bedjapur’s assassination, had just played out.

He carried Helene through the laboratory then into the sun-filled garden.

Tenderly, cautiously, Fantomas placed the young woman at the foot of a tree, in the shade, on a bed of soft, green grass dotted with flowers.

Then he attempted to revive her.

Gradually, Helene roused, opened her eyes, and uttered a few broken words.

“Help! Fandor!” she stammered.

The bandit, who was listening to her, clenched his fists.

“Fandor,” he repeated. “Always him! How much she loves him!’

Helene’s lips moved again and in a voice so quite it seemed like a breath, she murmured, “Fandor! Fandor!”

Suddenly, Fantomas stood up, frowned and, automatically, with a nervous hand, looked for the revolver he kept loaded in his pocket.

A cry rang out in the distance, a cry of concern, of anguish... a frightened cry. It seemed as if the cry responded to the young woman’s murmur.

Fantomas heard a loud voice call out, in a shattered tone, “Helene! Helene!’

The voice was Fandor’s.

Fantomas roared and looked around him. He saw no one. But, a few minutes later, he heard rushing footsteps, followed by voices.

It seemed to him that the noises came from the garden at the convalescent center, the facility that stood next to Bedjapur’s home.

“So, they’ve noticed that the young woman has gone missing!" he thought. “They’re surprised they cannot find her!”

Fantomas glanced at Helene who was gradually waking without seeing the bandit who stood behind her.

“Farewell,” stammered Fantomas, who once again rushed in the direction of the tumbledown cottage where Bedjapur’s body lay.

But, as he approached the old house, Fantomas stopped again... He heard voices again, footsteps. He just had time to hide behind a bush. From there he saw men, police officers, enter the building.

“They’re coming from all directions! They’ve no doubt discovered me... They’ll hunt me down,” grumbled Fantomas.

For a moment, he considered waiting for his adversaries, gun in hand, and killing a few before taking a chance on death, but Fantomas felt that his work was not done yet, that courage was pointless, that audacity was superfluous under the circumstances.

Fantomas assessed the situation quickly. Based on the shouts, the exclamations he had heard, coming from where Helene lay, he realized that the people who had entered the garden had discovered the young woman and that Fandor was at the head of the group.

At the same time, based on the orders that were given sharply, the meaningful whispering that reached his ears, Fantomas realized that Bedjapur’s house was filled with police officers, and probably surrounded, with all exits cut off.

He could still escape through the back of the garden and make his way to the end of Rue des Irlandais, as long as he could climb over a wall that was nine feet-high.

Fantomas did not hesitate.

“I’ll see you soon, Fandor,” He grumbled. “We lose nothing by waiting. We will meet again!”

Slipping under the clumps of bushes and along the trees, Fantomas reached the end of the park without being intercepted. With uncommon agility and herculean strength, he climbed on top of the wall and then down the other side in a matter of seconds.

But, as he reached that part of Rue des Irlandais which, fortunately for him was deserted, he could not keep himself from crying out in rage.

“Curses,” shouted Fantomas. “The diamonds I left behind will fall into Juve’s hands! Curses!”

Helene had been carried into the small room in the facility where she had spent the last few weeks and where she had gradually recovered her health after the terrible accident in the theater.

She had recovered from her fainting spell, but she was still distressed, troubled. Kneeling beside her bed, Fandor clasped her hand in his, while the elderly nurse attempted to explain to the journalist what had happened.

“She wanted to get out, the poor little one. She was strolling all alone in the park, but she was still too weak, she still needs to convalesce. Her strength gave way and we found her in a faint...”

Helene and Fandor listened to the nurse without paying any attention to her.

They were eager to find themselves alone. Particularly Helene. She indicated that she wanted to talk with Fandor, in particular, and as soon as the nurse withdrew, she drew the journalist close to her.

Breathless, in a voice filled with terror, she murmured in his ear, “Fantomas! Fantomas is still there! Fantomas has just killed Bedjapur in the house next door... Fantomas...”

The effort was too much for her and the young woman closed her eyes and fainted away again.

“Good grief!” stammered Fandor, calling for help. “What should I do? What does this new adventure mean?”



CHAPTER XVII - Saul



Juve and Fandor’s meeting in the sordid cottage on Impasse du Moulin, in Montrouge-Chatillon, had plunged the two men and those with them into deep bewilderment. When Fandor had managed to discover Fantomas’ lair in that tragic and dreaded neighborhood, he immediately set off to notify the Surete and had convinced Mr. Havard to come and surround the shack with a considerable number of policemen.

The attack on the dump was well organized, well planned and conducted marvelously.

When the signal was given, the police offices, who had been positioned all around the building, had all entered at the same time, guns in hands. There they discovered a man, whom they immediately surrounded on all sides but then they lowered their weapons and shouted in astonishment, surprised, because the man they had just captured, the man they were expecting to be Fantomas, was none other than Juve, a man they had not thought they would see since they thought he was busy taking care of the mysterious and private affairs of the Emperor of Russia, who was only expected to leave Paris the evening following that strange afternoon.

Fandor was just as surprised.

He rushed over to Juve, asking, “How did you get here? By what extraordinary coincidence have you come to be in Fantomas’ place?”

After bursting out laughing since, after all, he found the entire situation quite comical, Juve had coldly lit up a cigarette, sat down on a stool, and declared, “It’s really quite simple!”

The men formed a circle around him, listening, and Juve started to recount his adventures of the morning to them. Starting with the discovery of the mysterious chicken at Adele’s place, on Rue de Prony, and his shadowing of Mere Toulouche, which had taken him to Impasse du Moulin.

Fandor raised his arms to the sky.

“Juve! Juve! Why didn’t we meet and tell one another what we knew! You discovered Fantomas’ lair through Mere Toulouche and I...”

And Fandor in turn told Juve about his adventures with Bouzille, his encounter with the elderly criminal woman on the cart loaded with waste, at Quai de Javel, the chase in the taxi, which also led to the house in Montrouge.

“But,” shouted Fandor, “We have not lost the match. Just the contrary! And I feel that the longer we go on, the more the chains we add to the human net we are weaving around Fantomas will grow tighter.

“Fantomas has an accomplice, a friend, or possibly an adversary, or even yet some future victim, I don’t know what, with whom he has mysterious meetings in a house on Rue des Irlandais. We have to find out exactly what is going on there! Let’s go to the house on Rue des Irlandais!”

Along their way, the journalist gave his friend Juve the details of the mysterious night he had spent on the roof of Bedjapur’s house, an account that intrigued the policeman considerably.

Mr. Havard, the inspectors of the Surete, Juve and Fandor quickly returned to the Montagne Sainte-Genevieve. They walked past Rue d’Ulm and proceeded to Rue des Irlandais. Fandor’s heart pounded at the idea that their pursuit had taken him by quite chance close to the facility where

Helene was staying.

But, as he walked past the building, someone waved at him, looking so troubled that Fandor, alarmed, concerned, trembling with an inexplicable sense of foreboding, left his friends, abandoning Juve and Havard to go ahead and obtain information.

The person who had waved at him was Old Amelie.

“There you are, sir!” she shouted. “The good Lord has sent you here and I’m very pleased that I spotted you, just by chance!”

Then she added point blank, “What has happened to the young miss?”

“Helene!” shouted Fandor, alarmed. “You’ve lost Helene!”

“Oh!” stammered the nurse. “We certainly have to hope not... But Mademoiselle is young and she wanted to walk all alone in the park. She set out two hours ago and we haven't seen her since!”

The information, provided brutally, abruptly, categorically, hit Fandor like a hammer. He felt his legs give way and suddenly, he made an agonizing connection in his mind, realizing that the rest home was quite close to Bedjapur’s house and that he had heard that man speaking there with Fantomas.

Fandor rushed through the health center, overcome with fear. Unable to master his emotions, he shrieked, throwing caution to the wind.

He called, “Helene! Helene!”

That was the call Fantomas had heard. Those were the cries that had alerted the bandit, allowing him to make his escape.

Yet, Fandor found Helene who had been brought back to her little room in the rest home and bit by bit she had regained consciousness.

But she fainted again and Fandor stayed at her side, worried about her fate, concerned about his colleagues.

While Fandor was in the rest home, Mr. Havard, Juve and the police officers had reached Rue des Irlandais. They slipped along the walls, walking on tiptoe, trying not to make a single sound. Mr. Havard had given his men their instructions.

“Let's do what we did for the Impasse Moulin!" he said to them. “First let’s surround the house on all sides. Then, when I blow the whistle, head in, revolvers in your hands! If you see anyone, order them to raise their hands and, if they don’t obey immediately, shoot them to keep from being killed yourselves!’’

The Surete officers were brave. They felt safe, not only because their chief was there but, above all because Juve was leading them.

Plus, they had had enough of these perpetual chases, these unfruitful hunts. They were satisfied with the efforts deployed by the higher-ups at the Surete. Finally, they had decided to arrest Fantomas, at any cost, and they had to hope that they would manage to do so!

The manhunt started. Juve and Michel had forced the door that opened out onto the street and the first policemen had entered the small garden that stood next to the house. Other officers had climbed the wall, slipping over the rooftops. Mr. Havard, with Leon, was hunkered down behind a bush, watching the entrance to the cellar.

They had surrounded the house so quickly and silently that, if someone had been in the house, it would have most certainly been impossible for him to have the time to escape, let alone see that he had been surrounded.

A whistle rang out in the silence.

As if they had been launched by a sudden pull on a trigger, all of the policemen rushed into the house. They crossed through the room that looked like a cell and hurried into the laboratory. Juve was the first to enter the large rectangular room where the throne stood. The throne on which Bedjapur lay, motionless, curled up, head bent forwards...

Bedjapur was nothing more than a cadaver. Juve walked over to him, followed by Leon and Michel. Mr. Havard, noticing the individual sitting on the large seat, ordered,” Hands up!”

Juve imposed silence on the men.

“He's dead!” he shouted. Juve and the policemen all realized that instinctively.

Juve, however, leapt toward the unfortunate man, who was unknown to him. He tried to lift him up, pulling him out from under the large black cloak that had been thrown over his shoulders. Then he shivered when he saw the dagger thrust up to the hilt in the man’s chest. He shuddered when he looked at the piece of clothing that enveloped it.

The body was still warm. The assassination had taken place just a few moments earlier.

“Fantomas!” stammered Juve. “Another of Fantomas’ crimes!”

Then the policeman glanced at the chest filled with diamonds and other precious stones, uttering a few dumbfounded exclamations. Then, he cried out in joy, calling Mr. Havard.

“Come and see this! Come and see this,” he shouted. “Do you recognize these diamonds?”

Havard looked at the treasure, amazed.

“They’re magnificent” the chief of the Surete said, with a knowing look. “But I don’t recognize them at all.”

“Good grief!” said Juve, suddenly growing calm and adopting an enigmatic expression.

Havard wanted to ask for explanations.

“There’s no point,” Jive said, in an abrupt tone.

“It would take far too much time to explain it to you, particularly since time is of the essence.”

The policeman took out his watch and, looking at Mr. Havard, he asked, “At what time does His Majesty the Tsar leave France to head back to Russia?”

Havard looked at him, concerned.

“You’re mad!” he said. “What’s that to you?”

Juve grew impatient and said, “Please answer me!”

Michel intervened, saying “We’ve been ordered to be on duty for eight o’clock this evening at the Gare du Nord. That’s where the special train will depart from."

Juve nodded and replied, “Fine.”

He jotted a few notes down in his notebook, tore out the sheet of paper and, pulling Havard aside, he gave the other man the paper.

“This document is not very official, but I urge you Mr. Havard, to take it to his Majesty the Tsar right away.”

“Have you lost your mind?” the head of the Surete asked. “You don’t write to the Tsar like that!”

“I know,” said Juve. “But he will read it nevertheless and he will be pleased.

“What is this all about?” Havard asked.

Juve explained briefly, saying, “It’s about the Tsarita’s necklace... the famous necklace stolen by Fantomas, the necklace I’ve just found, in its entirety or just about! The bandit was so very clever! He knew that he was being pursued for weeks and he sought out the most extraordinary hiding places to stash various components that made up this necklace and which, when complete, is worth more than a million francs. Of course, the setting has disappeared, but the stones are all there...”

Juve walked over to the chest and quickly counted the diamonds.

“Oh, no, there’s one missing!”

He thought for a moment then, turning toward Leon and Michel, he ordered loudly, “My friends, do you recall the Impasse du Moulin from which we’ve just come?”

“Good grief!" said the men.

“Run back there right away," Juve added. “In the little room where I was, in the right corner, you will find a wicker cage. In that cage, there is a chicken. You will wring its neck and bring it to me!"

Leon and Michel, who were accustomed to obeying, rushed out to head back to Impasse du Moulin.

The head of the Surete was dumbfounded.

“Obviously, Juve,” he said. “It can only be one of two things. Either you have gone quite mad or you’re doing everything you can to mock us... Why have you sent Leon and Michel off like that to wring chickens’ necks, in a dump that both our adversaries and we have abandoned?”

Juve smiled.

“The chickens, dear Mr. Havard, play an important role in this matter. In the past, the geese on the Capitoline Hill saved the Romans by warning them about the arrival of their attackers. Today, the chickens, after serving as Fantomas’ accomplices, by hiding the precious stones from the Tsarita’s necklace in their gizzards, have sacrificed their lives to enable the police, and your humble servant, to find the Russian Empress’ jewels intact!”

And since Havard was looking at Juve in amazement, the policeman pushed him by the shoulders, forcing him to leave the room.

“I see that you don’t understand, but that’s not important. I’ll explain later.”

The two men entered the laboratory at that moment, where they found the other policemen who had spent several minutes searching thoroughly through the rest of the house.

“Nothing! Absolutely nothing” the men declared. “No one.”

“Yet,” said one, “It seems that large treasures must have been hidden in the cellars at one time. In the now empty crates, we found a few golden louis coins that seem to have been forgotten.”

“Good grief,” grumbled Juve. “Whenever Fantomas passes by, he doesn’t leave much behind.”

Havard stamped his feet.

“Juve!" he muttered. “I have no choice but to give up on the entire investigation, considering the incoherent manner in which you are behaving. You take over. I’m leaving!”

“And you’re perfectly right!" Juve replied childishly. “Off with you, Mr. Havard. I’ll wait for Leon and Michel here!”

“And my men?” asked the head of the Surete. “You know that I need them to oversee the departure of the Emperor of Russia...”

“That’s fine,” said Juve. “Let them leave with you. I’ll wait here alone.”

The head of the Surete withdrew, leaving the mysterious house on Rue des Irlandais. At the threshold of the door, he called out to Juve, “And that cadaver, that dead man we found with the dagger in his chest?”

“Well, you’ve thought of everything!” Juve said, voice dripping with irony.

Then, in a conciliatory voice, he added, “Don’t worry about a thing, dear man. I’ll interrogate the dead man... Who knows, perhaps he has a lot to say!”

Then Juve called out to the head of the Surete, “What about the diamonds?”

“Good grief," said Havard. “I don’t want to take charge of them. All I can do is take your note to the Tsar.”

“Do that then,” replied Juve. “And please inform his Majesty that I will be at the Gare du Nord this evening, that I will have the honor or returning the diamonds from the necklace whose disappearance has so distressed the Empress.”

Five minutes later, Juve was alone with the cadaver. He looked at it with an astonished, curious look. He walked around it, observing the old man’s body. It seemed, tall, noble, dignified, even robust.

Juve had never seen the man before, but he still recognized him. The description Fandor had given him of the hands, the hands he had seen from his perch atop the furnace of the laboratory, looking down the chimney, was all he needed to identify the man.

“These hands,” Fandor has said, “These hands were very brown, muscular. Nervous, large and vigorous, but distinguished.”

Juve saw the motionless hands, frozen in the rigor of death and murmured a name, “Bedjapur...”

The policeman moved closer. The setting sun cast its red rays through the glass roof. A ray of sun lit the old man’s shining, bare forehead. Juve had approached out of respect for the dead man. He wanted to move the body from its crumpled position on the throne, to stretch the man out on his back, to place him on the floor.

And, as he approached, the sunlight suddenly lit up the back of Bedjapur’s neck. Behind the old man’s ear, Juve saw a sign, a strange and unusual sign. It seemed to have been tattooed in the wrinkled skin of the old man. Juve’s eyes grew wide.

This sign, this tattoo, brought back all kinds of memories to him. He had seen it before, a long time ago, on the naked skull of an anonymous dead body that he had discovered in Natal, in Helene’s country. What was the connection between the sign marked on the skull discovered in South Africa and the tattoo on the head of the old man Fantomas had murdered?

Juve repeated the name over and over, “Bedjapur, Bedjapur!”

Then he suddenly cried out in triumph, like a mad man, counting on his fingers, spelling the name he had just uttered letter by letter, “B... E...

He cried out again.

“These letters... this name... they are the key to the mystery... what I’ve been seeking for such a long time. Good grief! That was the secret I needed. Bedjapur is the formula that I had to discover, to know, in order to be able to read and understand the mysterious parchments in my possession, the parchments that contain the revelation about Helene’s birth. Bedjapur!”

Juve sighed deeply with satisfaction.

“It was a good thing I kept those papers, that

I protected them from Fantomas at all costs, that I kept them in a secret hiding place where Fantomas could never find them!

“Bedjapur! Bedjapur! Bedjapur! Thanks to you, thanks to your name, thanks to the discovery I’ve just made, I will finally be able to satisfy Fandor’s curiosity and determine if what I’ve always suspected about Helene’s birth is true...”

Then Juve, overcome with emotion, took out his notebook and furiously wrote down all kinds of things. After an hour, he suddenly stopped.

Leon and Michel entered triumphantly.

Michel brandished the unfortunate chicken in one arm.

“Here’s the hen, boss!” he shouted.

And Juve replied, “Slit its gut. There we will find the only diamond missing from the Tsarita’s necklace!”



CHAPTER XVIII - Back from the Races



“There’s nothing to be said for it, but it’s still a fine mess! What misfortune, my old Bec-de-Gaz, that we can’t up set up house every eight days! That would be a fine time!”

Bec-de-Gaz, to whom these words were addressed in a sententious and convinced manner by Oeil-de-Boeuf, approved, nodding his head.

Of course,” he said gravely. “It’s not that it would be difficult to get married once a week, but the hard thing would be finding the cash and then women who would want to go with us...

“About that!" said Oeil-de-Boeuf, growing serious again, “Have you found yourself a good girl?”

“You, Oeil-de-Boeuf?”

“Jaspine first, Bec-de-Gaz.”

Leaving the ballroom which was filled with a frightening racket, the two friends headed for a small, neighboring room, where they discovered, on a table, a respectable number of bottles of red wine that had barely been opened.

“That,” they said together with sincere spontaneity, “That is for wetting our whistles.”

And before starting the conversation, before partaking in any discussion, they started by pouring copious glassfuls, which they downed voraciously.

Then they leaned on the ledge of the open window and looked down on the Seine, that flowed, in the background, in a dark line among the trees of the Bois de Boulogne.

“That’s so pretty!” said Bec-de-Gaz. “I think I’m going to wax a little poetical!”

But Oeil-de-Boeuf elbowed him.

“That’s not it at all,” he said. “See, it’s already late in the day. We’ll have to reach an agreement about Adele’s replacement!”

Neither of the two men wanted to be the first to start talking, and each waited to hear the other out.

There was a long silence during which they heard, coming from the neighboring ballroom, the deafening blare of an eight-man orchestra, accompanied by a player piano.

In that room, a crowd of dubious-looking but noisy people whirled about ceaselessly, dancing with a sickly passion, more as if they were performing a duty than enjoying themselves.

The room was lit by large windows that looked out on the sidewalk, that ran along the road, a dusty road, filled with automobiles which, barely out of Paris, were already starting to increase their speed to race up the slope that rose in front of them.

They were in Suresnes, at the foot of the famous village, in one of those large restaurants used for weddings and celebrations, which from morning to night, from night to morning, from one end of the year to the other, never emptied.

Early that morning, about twenty individuals had arrived, men and women, stepping out of some sort of large carriage benches, harnessed to horses and driven by a coachman who was already drunk, that had carried them from Belleville to Suresnes.

The breakfast had been ordered, the room reserved for the entire day and they wasted no time settling in for they were dying of hunger.

Obviously, it was a wedding, but a strange and abnormal wedding, for which there was no groom, no bride, in the traditional black suit and white dress. The guests looked more like bandits on a binge, like gatecrashers.

They had an unfortunate impact on the reputation of the Suresnes hotel but, since these people had paid in advance, that same evening through the intermediary of one of their number, they could not be criticized for their appearances.

And, instead of one groom, there were two, and instead of two brides, there were three or four prostitutes who seemed to be candidates.

This was the time, for Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz to replace Adele who had slyly abandoned them, preferring to live, as her former lovers said, in lace and champagne, rather than in the company of the sturdy friends from Menilmuche and De la Chapelle!

When Adele had so treacherously disappeared, the two men had initially considered taking care of business and sending her off to the cemetery, in order to teach her a lesson about living, but someone who headed the gang, someone whose advice sounded more like orders, had opposed that execution.

“Each one,” he had declared one day while discussing the matter in an abattoir in Belleville where he found himself, “Is free to live their live as he sees fit!”

And then he added, something that was not pleasant for Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz: “Moreover, I understand full well why Adele did not want to stay with two men like you.”

And he added again, “I forbid them to cause any harm to the nice little woman, who has done everything it takes to move into higher circles...”

Although, contrary to habit, Fantomas, had shown clemency toward Adele, and although he was still a general who was not happy with seeing the people in his gang, men or women, leave the group, it was no doubt because he was hoping that, when the right time came, Adele would help him into the inner circles of the rich Brazilian who she served as a mistress.

That man was covered with gold, from head to foot, and Fantomas always held rich people in high esteem, much like a wolf considers the lamb.

So, thanks to Fantomas, Adele's life had been spared and no one bothered upsetting the young woman.

As for Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil -de-Boeuf, who were deeply mortified by Fantomas’ opinion of them, they were initially angered and had decided to sulk after that and, knowing full well that the Master did not like that, they had changed their minds and decided, on the contrary, to prove to those in their circles that they were not as bad as people liked to say and they were capable of finding a replacement for Adele, perhaps even two.

Then, they announced that when that rare pearl was found, they would celebrate the fortunate event with a beautiful wedding at Chez Pere Korn.

Fantomas got wind of these projects.

And, to the great surprise of the band of criminals, he had, as the good prince he could be sometimes, decided that if Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz settled down it would be he, Fantomas, who would pay for the wedding, but that it would be an extraordinary wedding, a fantastic wedding.

That promise had driven up the level of enthusiasm and Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz decided to search actively for a bride.

For eight days, they had searched ceaselessly, maintaining a mysterious silence, communicating the results of their efforts to no one.

Then, one fine evening, when they were meeting with Fantomas, they declared, faces straight, “You know, boss, you can set your bomb off now, we’re both ready, we’re up to this!”

“Show me,” Fantomas said, distrustful,

“But the two criminals insisted on reserving the surprise for their friends. Fantomas consented.

The Master of Fear, the Criminal Genius could be nice when he wanted to. They had expected a nice, little party, but the wedding they received was fit for a king.

A carriage had arrived in the morning to pick up the guests, at their homes, at their doors, and take them to Suresnes, where they were informed that they could eat and drink to their fill. Naturally, they had made the most of that situation and imbibed as much as they possibly could. Then they had met the candidates for the hands of Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf.

There were three in all, three prostitutes from Belleville, who lacked nothing when it came to youth and charm. One of them, Jujube, a small red-head, a defector from Montparno, seemed to receive most of the votes and people had applauded loudly when, at the end of the meal, Bec-de-Gaz had carried her on his shoulders around the room, showing her off to his colleagues.

But, following that, Oeil-de-Boeuf had shown off an exquisite specimen from Point-du-Jour, called Salsifis, as a result of her slimness and snake-like flexibility. She was well-built, in any case, with superb black hair and wide, deep eyes.

Yet, after these two candidates had been presented, someone called out. It was a woman, who called out from among the guests, someone few of them knew.

In a hoarse voice, she asked, “Would it be possible to join the competition, without having been recommended?”

“Good grief!” someone exclaimed.

And then, everyone saw a small person stand up from her chair and leap onto the table with surprising agility. Everyone recognized her there. It was another prostitute from De la Chapelle who had once, or so it was said, been an acrobat who had performed at fairs.

Her name was La Grenouille, or the Frog, and she deserved that moniker.

She had a broad mouth that ran from ear to ear, flat, colorless hair, and protruding, strange, light grey eyes.

She was nimble and as supple as a grasshopper and her range of facial features was so extraordinary that she both terrified people and made them want to laugh.

La Grenouille was perfectly at ease in the middle of bottles and glasses on the table and her feet, housed in small varnished shoes with extremely high, red heels, moved with extreme skill in the midst of dessert trays.

“Don’t step in the jam!” people shouted at her.

Other added, “Don’t crush the cream puffs!”

In response, La Grenouille cast incendiary glances at the men, and scornful smiles at the women and, suddenly addressing the musicians in the orchestra, she said in her hoarse voice,

“What are you waiting for you idiots. Start the polka!”

The musicians, good guys, burst out laughing then grabbed their instruments and La Grenouille started dancing on the table with remarkable agility and grace.

Oeil-de-boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz were dumbfounded, but they were unable to make up their minds and looked at La Grenouille distrustfully.

“That’s certainly not a woman for us!” they thought. “She’s far too knowing. Our friends must have put her up to this!”

But it truly did seem as if there had been no prior shenanigans and, moreover, La Grenouille, when she was catching her breath between two polkas, declared “I’m applying! After all, why not? I may be ugly, but I’m foxy and fast... And, moreover, I’ve got no man at the moment so, if Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz want La Grenouille, I’m right here!

Thunderous applause broke out, highlighting the prostitute’s open declaration, but her words did not please Jujube or Salsifis.

And the two women, who had been adversaries up to that point, agreed to throw themselves at the new rival.

“First,” observed Salsifis, “No one invited you to come here... You weren’t chosen by anyone... So, get down from that table and go back to your place.”

Jujube approved, saying “That’s not how people here behave. Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz are free to choose between Salsifis and Jujube, and there’s no place for La Grenouille in the room!”

“That remains to be seen,” replied La Grenouille who, hands on her hips, was looking at the two other candidates with a challenging air.

And she proudly added, “If either of you wants to, I’ll take you on!”

The onlookers were most amused.

“A fight!” they shouted. “Let’s see all three of them get into it! This is going to be such fun!”

There was a gambler in the band who was familiar with racetrack betting and he shouted loudly, “Who wants in? I’m playing! Two against Salsifis! Three for Jujube! We pay for La Grenouille!”

La Grenouille, however, had climbed down from her table and jostling the dancing pairs who were forming despite the altercation, she sought to approach Jujube and Salsifis.

As for those two, who were a little concerned by the determined look on La Grenouille’s face and fearing they would come out worse for the wear, they were looking about for Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz, to come to their aid.

But, at the start of the discussion, Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz had disappeared, not wanting to get into this feminine fist fight.

Adele’s two former lovers were in a small, neighboring room, looking out at the Seine flowing by in silence.

Finally, Bec-de-Gaz asked, “Have you chosen, Oeil-de-Boeuf?”

“Not yet," the other man replied. “How about you, Bec-de-Gaz?"

“Me, I’m feeling things out. I don’t have an opinion."

Oeil-de-Boeuf, who had discovered Jujube, boasted about her qualities, saying, “She’s nice, she has a good personality..."

But Bec-de-Gaz, who had discovered Salsifis, promoted his protegee.

“She's thin, dry, and robust, a real workhorse...”

“I’m not saying no,” added Oeil-de-Boeuf, undecided.

Then they looked at one another and said together, “But, when it comes to entertainment, La Grenouille is really great!”

The two men observed another deep silence which they attempted to empty into two more wine bottles.

“All the same,” sighed Bec-de-Gaz, “Making your way through life is hard.”

“We’re too handsome,” said Oeil-de-Boeuf. “All the women run after us!”

They listened. A deafening racket came from the neighboring room, drowning out the orchestra and the rhythmic footsteps of the dancers.

There had certainly been a fight; people were shouting and swearing at one another.

The criminals looked at one another, faces glowing gloriously.

“You see,” said Bec-de-Gaz. “All of that racket is for us!”

“Well, not to be too flattered or anything,” declared Oeil-de-Boeuf, “but it still feels good...”

Just then, the door opened with an abrupt shove. Three disheveled women with gleaming eyes, rushed into the room, panting.

“Oeil-de-Boeuf! Bec-de-Gaz!” they shouted, all at the same time.

“I flattened her!”

“I put her in her place. She doesn’t exist anymore!”

“You have to take me, I’m stronger than she is!”

The two criminals, flabbergasted by this feminine invasion, could not tear themselves away from the three women who, somewhat drunk, were throwing themselves at the men, grabbing them by the necks, grasping their hands.

Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf found it all very amusing.

“This is so much fun! We’re having such fun! Good grief! If only this could start over again every week!”

Suddenly, Bec-de-Gaz shouted, “Oeil-de-Boeuf, I have an idea!”

But Oeil-de-Boeuf interrupted him, shouting, “Bec-de-Gaz, I’ve come up with an idea!”

And suddenly, they were speaking at the same time, describing the same project that had just popped into both minds.

“What if we kept all three?” they shouted.

The women were stunned, not knowing if they should laugh or be angry and then, since they had drunk copiously, since they had fought and then reconciled, they enthusiastically welcomed the new project.

“Yes! Yes! Bravo!” they shouted. “All three of us will be the wives of Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf!”

A formidable din filled the small room, flowing in from the large one, to such an extent that the walls seemed to shake when, suddenly, silence washed over everything like an enchantment.

A man with a hard, energetic face, with a powerful gaze, with a robust frame, had just entered the large room and was crossing through it heading for the small one.

Seeing that the dancers were no longer dancing, he stopped for a second and, in a furious tone, said, “So, what are you waiting for? Go on as if I weren’t here!”

Obediently, and without saying a word, the gang members started spinning in rhythm, to the tireless tune of the orchestra.

The man, however, just walked on into the small room. With an energetic wave of his hand, he chased the three women away, retaining the men and, once he was alone with them, he sat down, while they remained standing and struck the table, declaring, “Now let’s chat for a few minutes!”

Oeil-de-Boeuf, Bec-de-Gaz, little Louis, a gang member who was coming out of the WC and Fat Alfred, a 50-year-old guy who had spent 30 years of his life in Guyana, surrounded the newcomer, refraining from saying his name in case the walls had ears.

The newcomer was, in fact, none other than Fantomas!

The bandit arrived with the expression he reserved for great days, glaring wildly, looking nervous.

No one dared make a joke, utter a word, move. Fantomas, who tapped nervously on the table, for a few moments, with an empty glass he had picked up automatically, lifted his head, looked at the men around him and asked, “So, you’ve enjoyed yourselves?”

A few vague approving murmurs responded.

“Well then!” continued the bandit in a deep voice. “The time has come to do a little work!” He looked at Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz. “Men!" he said. “Try not to spend your wedding night in jail”

Bec-de-Gaz attempted a joke, saying “Don’t worry Fantomas! We’ll go back on our best behavior, like little angels!”

But Fantomas interrupted him, “If you go back now, you’ll go back with your pockets empty. But I want you all to be rich this evening. Only, you’ll have to apply yourselves.!”

Little Louis elbowed Fat Alfred.

“We’re probably going to dip into the cash reserve at the bistro,” he said.

Fantomas stared at Little Louis severely.

“You,” he said, “Shut up! I didn't ask for your opinion. Shut up and listen!”

Fantomas made sure that the doors were closed, that people were still dancing in the next room, and then he returned to the conversation, without raising his voice too much.

“The races are on at Longchamp today,” he said.

Fantomas looked at his watch.

“Five o’clock. The meeting must be over. Fine! We have to let the crowd leave. We still have more time than we need to prepare.”

“What are we going to do?” asked Bec-de-Gaz.

Fantomas replied, “It’s quite simple. The Societe des courses must have taken in a good amount; there was an interesting program and the weather stayed good all day. Well, that money will be ours, that’s all! I’ve decided that it belongs to us now and all we have to do is take it.”

Fantomas took a pencil out of his pocket, along with a sheet of paper, which he spread over the table. Then, like a general in the middle of his senior officers setting out a battle plan, he started to draw a brief plan on the blank piece of paper, indicating the paths in the Bois de Boulogne. Then, as his accomplices bent over his work, he stuck his pencil in the paper, at the exact spot where the drawing showed a crossroads.

“There,” he said. “That’s where we’ll take the gold!”

It was seven o’clock in the evening. Night was falling.

The Bois de Boulogne was almost deserted and the Longchamp race track, which had been so noisy earlier, so busy during the afternoon races, was now plunged into the deepest silence.

A white mist rose from the edge of the Seine, enveloping the racetrack, the stands and the surrounding woods in a thickening fog.

Had the racetrack been completely deserted since the last cart carrying horses had driven away from the paddock?

Not quite!

Inside a small office positioned under the weighing station, a dozen senior employees, under the supervision of the treasurer of the Societe des courses, were completing the tallies and putting the money away.

Outside, four large carriages waited patiently.

The money earned that day had been placed in robust metal boxes and, once the accounts had been tallied, four racetrack employees climbed into the first carriage, placing a large, very heavy chest between them, containing all of the money.

On the seat of the vehicle, next to the driver, sat two police officers. This first bus set out, filled with agents, followed by the vehicle carrying the chest of cash, followed by yet another vehicle with security guards.

The three carriages did not go far. They were waiting for other similar vehicles, that were also loaded with great caution.

There was the carriage with the silver, the carriage with the gold and the carriage with the bank notes...

The races had been lucrative; the profits were extraordinary, considerable.

The Company’s head treasurer, who had attended the departure of the first vehicles, took his place in the one carrying the bank notes, which followed on the heels of the vehicle with the gold. He climbed into the vehicle, along with two other employees, a few police officers. They were followed by another vehicle carrying additional guards.

This veritable caravan, which included exactly nine vehicles, was trotting slowly through the Bois de Boulogne, which was plunged into shadow.

There was nothing abnormal or extraordinary about the trip organized under these circumstances. Every race day, the proceeds were transported to the head office. The greatest precautions were taken to safeguard it and the number of officers in the previous vehicles was a veritable guarantee against attacks by evil-doers.

At this late hour, they encountered few people in the Bois de Boulogne. The trip proceeded unhindered and, after discussing this and that in the vehicles the officers and the Racetrack employees generally found themselves with nothing more to say and thought about their respective affaires, drowsing a bit, tired after their hard day of work.

They were about to leave the forest. They had reached the Pavilion chinois, and the uninterrupted caravan of vehicles loaded with gold and silver was preparing to drive onto the Avenue du Bois-du-Boulogne when suddenly the treasurer who had been staring straight ahead cried out.

“Look there,” he shouted. “Look at that racing vehicle!”

The treasurer’s exclamation startled the drowsing police officers and guards.

They too cried out, concerned.

A large carriage pulled by five horses was galloping at full speed toward them, clearly giving the impression that the driver was not in full control

In the packed carriage, women cried out, men cried out and, as it drew closer, they realized that it carried people who were late for some wedding at Suresnes and whose joyous day was about to be transformed into tragedy.

People here and there in the vehicle carrying the treasurer cried out as they watched the other carriage race toward them.

What should they do?

What would happen to them?

Up until the very last minute, they hoped that the driver would manage to rein in his horses and avoid colliding with the caravan of vehicles.

They continued to hope, up until the moment when a terrible, frightful, collision occurred. There was a terrifying racket mingled with cries of pain and anguish.

The accident everyone feared had occurred. The carriage pitched forward like a race car and collided with the vehicle carrying the bank notes. Both vehicles cartwheeled, breaking and scattering their passengers every which way.

It was a moment of general panic.

The horses, injured, neighed and kicked, blood flowing everywhere; the men and women had been scattered about, injured as well, by shards of broken glass. A few unfortunates lay under the wheels, half crushed.

The treasurer of the racetrack company had been struck violently on the head and lost consciousness. However, emergency services were being organized...

One of the agents, with an alacrity and dedication that did him honor, had rushed into duty as quickly as possible. He uncoupled the tangled horses, lifted the carriages and took charge of the injured.

Two others had grabbed the treasurer who was lying inanimate, and precisely since an automobile, a luxurious limousine stopped nearby, they wanted to carry the unfortunate employee off into it.

But, just as they opened the door and were planning on telling the owner of the expensive vehicle to carry the injured man to his home, they dropped the treasurer on the ground and cried out in surprise. Inside the limousine, put there by some inexplicable means, but indisputably real, inside the limousine, there was an enormous case containing bank notes, the receipts from the racetrack!

The agents were dumbfounded. Inside the limousine there was a man whose torn clothing, covered with dust, seemed to indicate that he had just been the victim of an accident.

First, they thought it was some company employee, but as they were about to approach him, the man pointed a revolver at them and the limousine started up!

“Help! The thief!” yelled the agents.

A Sergeant appeared and leapt onto the car’s running board. But, just then, he cried out. He had recognized the mysterious traveler and cried out in fear.

“Fantomas!”

At the same time, he cried out in pain and fell to the ground bathed in blood. A shot had just rang out. Fantomas had shot him to death!

Meanwhile, the wedding party was spreading out in all directions of the woods, disappearing under the trees.

The wedding party was none other than Fantomas’ sinister team.

The bandit had planned well!

The attack had been savage but successful and, while they were trying, as best they could, to lift the demolished carriage, Fantomas’ accomplices headed off, one by one, separately, deploying like infantrymen, each familiar with the rallying point where Fantomas, faithful to his promise, would soon share the loot...



CHAPTER XIX - The End of the World



“Well, people can say what they want, but today things are not going well! First of all, I'm feeling a tad nostalgic. It’s as if I have a snake in my belly and its plugging my ears... or as if there is a cockroach in my mind that’s gnawing away at my heart... No, one thing for sure, things are not going well... My gizzard is trembling and that makes me want to shout out loud, to return to the Arc de Triomphe!”

Bouzille was the one uttering these strong words and Bouzille was addressing them to one of the individuals he had held in the highest of esteem for quite some time.

It was an honest coal merchant who did not actually sell coal, but who did have a small counter made of dirty, spotted zinc on which strong alcoholic drinks flowed.

Quite naturally, Bouzille felt infinitely better in that booth than in a palace. He lived somewhere in the neighborhood, but he left his shack early in order to come and settle in the bar, both elbows leaning on the zinc counter, hands wrapped around a glass, holding forth, chatting, spending his day waiting for buddies who, more fortunate than he was, could order a round, which was not difficult, and pay for it, which was much more so.

Bouzille had grown close to the wine merchant.

This intimacy, moreover, translated in a remarkable manner. The merchant never said a word. He was by nature, deeply withdrawn. And, although he hated speaking, he did know how to listen.

Bouzille, who, on the contrary, was quite chatty, naturally appreciated this listener who let him talk without ever interrupting and who constantly nodded his head in approval.

Yet, Bouzille’s soul had been in mourning for some time.

Bouzille didn’t understand anything that was going on. He was witnessing, apparently impassively, but deeply touched inside, a complete upheaval of the habits of the underworld.

And Bouzille who was neither a thief nor an assassin, but who had, throughout his entire life, been involved with both, Bouzille, who had a cheerful philosophy, proclaimed it out loud, “It’s the end of the world! Nothing is safe. At this very moment, cops are shaking people up for no reason, and no one can be certain of anything, except drinking his glass quietly, without being thrown into the slammer!”

In fact, the police had been enormously active for some time...

Fantomas’ latest attacks had really been too much. All of the media had decided to conduct a campaign against what the journalists referred to as “police inertia”.

Meetings had been held, public meetings, in numerous public places people had given violent speeches demanding energetic measures and the police were now taking those energetic measures.

“It’s no laughing matter,” said Bouzille, commenting on the events in a sad voice. “I don’t know what’s happening, I don’t know if there’s any connection with the middle class, who have all turned yellow, but one thing is sure, things are not going well in the underworld!”

In fact, no one felt quite comfortable in the shady neighborhoods of Paris. The entire shady population, the Greeks, the thieves, the brothers in arms, were trembling. By stirring up the police, Fantomas had brought terrible reprisals down on all of the miserable wretches.

Every day, there were roundups, raids, and the Prefecture published seemingly impressive statistics.

“They call it a clean-up!” Bouzille continued. “I think they’re just getting in our way. Nowadays, when you simply don’t have 10,000 francs for rent, when you’re not a billionaire, you have to get out of the way as soon as you see a cop... or they’ll be on you. It’s true. Things always wind up turning sour in the long run.”

The wine merchant simply nodded in response to the peremptory remark and took the opportunity to add, “That’s true.”

Then he seemed to rouse himself from his deep lethargy and asked Bouzille, “What are you drinking?”

Just then, Bouzille grimaced.

Bouzille was an old fox who was familiar with all the tricks barkeepers kept up their sleeves. He knew that that traditional question, when uttered by the lips of a wine merchant, was not an invitation to have a drink. It was simply an order to drink something, otherwise he would have to leave the premises.

The wine merchant was quite tolerant of

Bouzille, in fact, and for that very reason Bouzille encouraged all of his buddies to drink, when they arrived.

But this morning, no one came.

Under the circumstances, Bouzille was becoming bothersome. He could not be left alone in the shop, in fact, since he adored sugar. Left to his own devices, Bouzille did not steal bottles, since that would be noticed, but he did like to empty the sugar bowl.

So, in an effort to invite him to take off, the barkeeper asked, “So, what are you drinking?”

“Nothing,” replied Bouzille. “I have to go to the bank...”

And he left with a dignified air, raging inside.

“What a clot that guy is!” he thought. “I'm definitely going to take my business elsewhere! Times are so hard that I’ll have to join the temperance league!”

Once on the sidewalk, Bouzille hesitated. He looked right and left, he seemed to be inspecting the area, with worried caution. His long white beard floated down over his sweater and he twisted it with a feverish hand.

“Which way will I go?” Bouzille grumbled. “Which way will I go?”

The old tramp sniffed the air for at least five minutes. Then, after checking the wind, he turned to the right and headed in the direction of La Villette.

“It’s funny!" grumbled Bouzille. “Obviously, when I was sleeping, I must have swallowed a match! My stomach is burning. I have to find some guy to buy me a glass or two, in order to quench the fire!”

Bouzille walked with a most extraordinary little skip.

He was following the arcades in the city and seemed to leap from pillar to pillar, as playing some extraordinary game of hide and seek.

“Hmm!” he said from time to time. “I have to open an eye and the right one. Still, I wouldn’t like to get stuck, particularly since it’s summer, and I’d enjoy going to the country. It wouldn’t be good to get thrown into jail.”

Bouzille proceeded in this manner for about 20 minutes. Suddenly, as he was approaching the Lariboisiere hospital, he stopped, and hid behind a pillar, from where he observed the leprous facade of an abominable hotel.

Bouzille observed the building for a good 15 minutes.

“Is it quiet?” he wondered. “Are there any cops in the neighborhood? Good grief, it would be stupid to get caught in a mouse trap!”

But the hotel seemed normal. It was unlikely that the police were operating there at the time.

“Let's take a chance,” thought Bouzille. “A bottle is well worth a little effort!”

And he headed over to the hotel.

Bouzille had friends everywhere. In this building, he knew a cat burglar, a very well informed man, who wasn’t afraid of God, but who seriously feared being arrested. This man took such pains to avoid arrest that he had been nicknamed Fearful.

Bouzille was going to see Fearful, with the hope of asking his brother to buy a round.

Bouzille entered the corridor of the hotel, which was closed by means of an openwork balustrade. He knocked at a low door, protected by a metal mesh against possible attacks. It was the hotel office.

The door opened and Bouzille found himself facing the owner, a giant whose fists were always clenched, ready to strike his tenants.

“Good day!" said Bouzille.

And since he was greeted in return, he immediately asked, “Tell me, is Fearful in?”

“No,” replied the boss.

Bouzille was upset by this.

“That’s strange!” he said. “Fearful never goes out in the daytime.”

The hotel owner shrugged.

“Well, he’s not here,” he replied. “Anything else?”

“Well.... Nothing...” answered Bouzille, who was already retreating. “By any chance did anything happen to him?”

The hotel owner scornfully released this information, “Dear boy, what happens is always what should happen. Fearful is in the country. That's that.”

Bouzille, naturally, turned white.

“Drat!” he said. “He was caught?”

“Yes, caught,” said the owner. “While waiting for your turn, it was his...”

Bouzille immediately stopped insisting. He uttered a vague groan that could have been taken for either a curse or a respectful greeting, then left the building grumbling.

“Well, that’s just dandy,” he continued once he was outside. “Life is really going badly... And we all wind up... This is going to wake up my rheumatism... Le Bedeau who went to the cemetery, Fearful who’s out in the country in prison, so many others who have been caught, raids every evening, Good grief. It’s hard to know who’s dead and who’s alive."

And Bouzille, who like to flatter himself for having political ideas shouted, “What was the point of starting a Republic!"

Yet, Bouzille did not insist. He even started trotting with all his strength, just as he finished his utterance. Obviously, he was playing with misfortune that morning. Had he not, in fact, just spoken in front of a cop? Well, that would have been fine to be picked up for making subversive comments!

“Not, it’s not often,” he sighed. “It’s not often that I would bring dishonor down on myself for something like that. Republic or no republic, I don’t give a hoot. It’s friends I want to find!”

At that moment, as Bouzille was at the corner of Rue de la Goutte-d’Or, he had an inspiration.

“What about Korn’s place?” he thought. “It would be wonderful if I were to find a little friend there...”

He headed for Korn’s place, hugging the walls, a little concerned about the presence of a certain number of individuals who seemed to be strangers to the neighborhood.

“I can smell cops” Bouzille said.

But it was too late to turn back. Plus, he was too thirsty to give up the hope of a free round.

Bouzille continued on his way imperturbable, until he reached Pere Korn’s cabaret.

The dump had hardly changed.

It was exactly as it had always been and nothing had been changed since it was founded, from the time when, in the past, a long time ago, Fantomas used to recruit his man accomplices there and give instructions to those were now, unfortunately, dead, to Barbu, Le Bedeau and Ribonnard.

Bouzille entered the cabaret and breathed deeply in satisfaction.

“Hey! It’s me, Pere Korn! How are you, old man?”

Pere Korn grumbled. He was, as always, standing behind his counter, sleeves pulled up on his hairy arms, hands hidden in a sink of greasy water in which he was washing glasses.

Pere Korn had grumbled.

Inside, Bouzille was flattered since Pere Korn only grumbled for those he recognized. Surely, Bouzille must have been pleasant to the barkeeper for the man to show him such perfect friendship!

Bouzille, however, having barely entered the dump, was looking about to see who was there. First, he saw three young criminals who were talking in hushed voices in a corner. Bouzille recognized them immediately. One of them was called Savate, the other Mouche-ton-Nez and the third was the Lutteur.

“Well,” said Bouzille. “They look like they’ve swallowed poison. Business certainly isn’t doing well.”

Behind them, two women were chatting. One of them was Marie-Salope, who had a ring of grime around her neck. And the other was Marie-Quarante-Sous, a show-off who had a new man every week and who never worked since she was incredibly lazy.1111

“What’s up with them,” Bouzille wondered. “Has the cat got their tongue? They’re not talking.”

And Bouzille, who liked the fair sex, headed over to the girls.

“Hey, Marie-Salope, what did you find in the bottom of the washtub that’s made you stop talking? Tell me, Marie-Quarante-Sous, who’s put you in such a foul mood?’’

Bouzille was joking in a friendly manner. And he was sure of the effect he had. All of the women in the neighborhood adored him. He passed for a dandy, a bit odd, a screwball perhaps, but he wore his heart on his sleeve and he always made people laugh with his tales of the other world.

Yet, Bouzille, who was hoping for an invitation to take a seat since he always authorized women to pay rounds for him, was dumbfounded by his lack of success.

“Get lost!” said Marie-Salope.

“Shut up!” ordered Marie-Quarante-Sous.

Then, pointing a finger at a dark corner of the bar, she added, “First, you shouldn’t be making such a racket. You didn’t notice your lawful wife?”

When he heard those words, Bouzille jumped back.

His lawful wife! They were talking about his lawful wife! That, for example, did not sit well with him. If people were talking about his lawful wife, then he would prefer to leave immediately.

Bouzille, however, inspected the end of the bench that had been pointed out to him, with his piercing eyes. There was, in fact, an enormous, unrecognizable pile of rags there. But Bouzille was not about to let himself be taken in by that heap of rags. He was able to clearly make out a human shape, curled up on the floor, limbs every which way, with an enormous stack of waste, unmoving, clearly a sign of deep drunkenness.

“Yeah!” sighed Bouzille, with a questioning tone. “Is that La Toulouche, then?”

“It is,” said Marie-Salope.

Bouzille immediately turned around. He had had an inexplicable thing, in fact, for the abominable shrew. And Bouzille had a terrifying memory of that time. Despite her age, La Toulouche had still been quite strong. As a result, when Bouzille thought back on the time when he was that woman’s happy lover, he almost felt like shouting when he recalled the daily beatings he had received.

The worst thing was that Bouzille had regained his freedom through trickery and La Toulouche had never forgiven him. She still called him her man and she was always prepared to swear eternal love for him.

“Yeah!" Bouzille said again, tiptoeing away, “This neighborhood is not for me! Not enough women for me. First, since I became a hermit, I’ve no longer any need for the deceitful charms of that gender!”

At that moment, Bouzille was stepping behind the counter. He gave Pere Korn a friendly wink and asked, “Is there anyone down there?”

Pere Korn did not answer; he simply spat on the floor.

Bouzille, who was familiar with unspoken languages, interpreted this as a positive affirmation.

So, he went down into the cellars where, he also knew that people could, as a favor, go to drink.

Yet, when Bouzille was barely halfway down the ladder, he had a clear view of three individuals sitting around a table and occupied in a most pleasant manner, judging by the glasses that stood in front of them.

Naturally, Bouzille listened in. Discretion was not his strong point, but indiscretion was his skill.

Moreover, he had immediately recognized two of the individuals at the table: Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz.

“Who are they with?” Bouzille wondered. But try as he might to make out the face of the third person, that man was sitting with his back to the light, and was no more than a black silhouette, impossible to identify.

Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz, moreover, must have been very drunk. But that didn't stop them from drinking like fish. Bec-de-Gaz stopped drinking, precisely to hum a cheerful song in a slow voice, attempting to keep time, like a funeral dirge.

Oeil-de-Boeuf was obviously trying to express an idea and his drunkenness prevented him from completing a sentence and he had to keep repeating the same words over and over, “Well, you see, that disgusts me. It disgusts me because, well, it disgusts me... And like that, it disgusts me...”

He repeated it over and over!

Bouzille, however, having observed his two friends and realizing what condition they were in, felt immensely satisfied.

“When you’re drunk, you don’t know what’s going on...” he thought. “And, well, if someone steals your glass...”

With that, he climbed down into the cellar.

When he wanted to, Bouzille had excellent manners. With his hand on his heart, he greeted the third individual who was pouring drinks for Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz and who seemed to be less drunk than his two friends.

At the same time, Bouzille said, “When there’s some for one, there’s some for two... When there’s some for two, there’s some for three... and when there’s some for three, there’s some for four!”

At the same time, he smiled, a broad smile, reaching out a hand to grab the bottle, since he was profoundly indifferent to the fact that he had no glass.

Yet, Bouzille had not completed this action when he suddenly jumped.

“Oh, good grief!” he said.

And, looking at the face of the man he had not recognized earlier, he said, “Fantomas! Is that you, Fantomas?”

The man stood up.

It was indeed Fantomas. At that moment, he was staring at Bouzille with that extraordinary look, both fiery and filled with shadows, that no one could bear without looking down.

And, voice dripping with scorn, Fantomas said, “Good day, Bouzille!”

Then, as the old tramp was retreating, still holding the bottle he had grabbed, Fantomas rudely ordered, “Put that down, Bouzille. Drop that wine, you imbecile. I’m not going to execute you!”

Bouzille opened his eyes wide, surprised, and said “Eh? What are you saying Fantomas?”

At that moment, the criminal mastermind grabbed Bouzille by the shoulder and pushed him toward the ladder, saying “I said that I have no need to execute you. You have never betrayed me. Not like these imbeciles!”

He pointed at Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz.

Bouzille was completely dumbfounded.

“These imbeciles,” he repeated. “And you say you’re going to execute them? Good grief, Fantomas, I must have grown stupid, but I don’t understand...”

Bouzille was most certainly the only person in the world who could talk like that to Fantomas. The Criminal Mastermind allowed the old man to ask questions, even smiling at his distraught expression.

“You don’t understand?” he asked. “Well, you will understand.”

And, laughing again, Fantomas added, “In an hour Bec-de-Gas and Oeil-de-Boeuf will simply be two cadavers.”

This time, Bouzille turned white. He understood what was going on even less. What? Was Fantomas really going to kill Bec-de-Gaz and Oeil-de-Boeuf ? What did that mean?

Appalled, immobile, Bouzille continued to stare at Fantomas, who burst into laughter again.

“Hey, do I seem incredible to you?” he asked. “But truly, poor Bouzille, it’s just simply because you don’t see well.”

“I don’t see well?” Bouzille repeated. “Why?”

“Because,” continued Fantomas, “Because you came here and saw nothing. Get up the ladder!”

Bouzille climbed up the ladder. When he was halfway up, however, he stopped, astonished.

“Well,” he said. “Fantomas, someone is knocking at the cabaret door...”

“Naturally!” replied the bandit.

“Naturally what?” asked Bouzille, who was starting the tremble. But Fantomas pushed him from behind.

“Up!” ordered the bandit in a voice that brooked no response. “So, you don’t understand, Bouzille?”

Then Fantomas slowly added, “Well, my good friend, the police are arriving. My dear old man, the cabaret is surrounded. There are more than 50 officers in the street. I killed Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz by poisoning them while they were drunk, quite obviously, to keep them from being arrested. Do you understand now? Yes? Well, that’s fine. So, up with you Bouzille! I’m telling you the police are knocking...”

Fantomas was obviously very calm. Yet, the words he uttered were so abominable frightful.

Bouzille climbed up, obeying the order he had received. He climbed up like a robot.

“Good grief!" he hissed between clenched teeth. “So, we’re all about to get caught?”

And, before he leapt into the cabaret, he turned back once again., saying “Good grief, if the police are knocking then for sure they will come in... and if they come in, you’ll be caught, Fantomas!”

When he heard those words, Fantomas burst out laughing.

“Me?” he said. “Be off with you. I don’t get caught!”

“It’s possible,” grumbled Bouzille. “But I wouldn’t say so.”

Bouzille stopped suddenly, as he felt someone grab his belt.

Behind him, Fantomas had stretched out his arm, pulled him away from the ladder and hurled him with Herculean strength into the middle of the cabaret,

“They take those I allow them to take,” Fantomas declared coldly.

And, as he stepped into the cabaret, the extraordinary bandit called out “Friends! The police are here!”

At that moment, for the third time, someone knocked at the door to the bar. A voice, the voice of a police commissioner no doubt, repeated the third legal warning, “Open up in the name of the law!”

“Don’t open, Korn!” Fantomas ordered.



CHAPTER XX - Master of All



Fantomas’ voice was, as always, profoundly calm, profoundly peaceful, although the minutes raced past and the danger of falling into the clutches of the police was there, immediate, certain, real.

The legal warnings have been slow initially, but the last one was uttered in an imperious tone.

Judging by the manner in which the police commissioner said, “Open in the name of the law”, it was easy to guess that, if they did not open in the name of the law, the police would most certainly enter by force. Fantomas had issued a contrary order, in a quiet voice, to the innkeeper.

“Don’t open Korn!”

And Pere Korn, in fact, was not moving away from his counter, behind which he seemed to be completely devastated, while Fantomas, who was standing in the middle of the cabaret, crossed his arms and looked at those around him.

“My friends,” the Master of All and of Everyone said. “We are arriving at a painful moment of a deadline. In recent times, I have had you take part in many interesting tasks, you have made a great deal of money. You should be grateful to me for all this. The police, on the other hand, are furious with you. There are, I imagine, about 50 officers or so on the other side of the door and they are determined to be finished with you. As a result, please pay attention. Every man for himself. I have nothing more to say to you!”

Fantomas was speaking in a half-serious, have scornful tone and his words, naturally, stirred strong, and most justified, feelings on the part of those listening to him.

The Master had never before said, “Every man for himself”! He had never appeared to be so completely, so absolutely disinterested in the fates of his accomplices.

What was Fantomas thinking?

Was he dreaming about a moment of annihilation, of dropping them into the hands of the police, of abandoning those who had been his assistants, loyal up to that time in the paths of crime?

Was it true, as he had told Bouzille, that he had poisoned Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz?

Was he going to let Mere Toulouche get arrested?

At that precise moment, the old woman had leapt up from her bench and, pushing Bouzille aside, had thrown herself in Fantomas’ direction.

“No!” screamed La Toulouche. “You aren’t going to let them arrest us like that!”

Fantomas stared at her and shrugged.

“Why not?” he asked.

“You’ve always saved us... Save us now!”

In response, Fantomas tilted his head to one side and raised his hand to one ear, like a man prepared to listen.

“La Toulouche,” he said. “The officers are gathering at this very moment. In four or five minutes, they will certainly have decided how they will proceed.”

“Fantomas! Fantomas! Save us!”

“And,” continued Fantomas. “The way in which they will proceed is very easy indeed to determine. They will go to some worksite and pick up a large piece of wood, which they will use as a battering ram. They will smash the door and they will come in...”

He was still speaking in the same calm voice, like a man announcing events that are completely beyond his control. Moreover, his face had not grown pale; his actions showed no signs of nervousness and he seemed as peaceful as if there were not just a single plank of wood between him and the police officers.

At that moment, La Toulouche, haggard and pale, sweat beading on her forehead, literally rolled about on the floor.

“I’ve got out of prison,” she shrieked. “You can’t let me get arrested again! Save me, Fantomas! Save me!”

Fantomas pushed her away with the tip of his foot.

Scornfully, with a hint of anger in his voice, the miserable wretch respond to the old woman, saying “La Toulouche, I would certainly have saved you if you had treated me well. Unfortunately, you betrayed me."

“When Fantomas? When?”

“Very recently, La Toulouche. I gave you a black hen to keep and you passed it on to Bouzille. I don’t like it when people disobey my orders. I like it even less when people pass on the missions I’ve given them to others.”

La Toulouche, kneeling, twisted her hands in despair.

“Bouzille stole the chicken!” she shouted.

But just then, Bouzille, who had been looking about every which way, said, “Lying woman!”

Fantomas calmed him with a movement of his hand.

“Shut up, Bouzille!”

The Criminal Mastermind placed his hand on La Toulouche’s shoulder.

“You don’t deserve any pity,” he insisted. “You deny an error that you committed and place it on the shoulders of an innocent man. Bouzille did not steal that hen. Let’s drop that matter. Didn’t you give a hen to Bee and Oeil, who turned it over to Adele?”

La Toulouche did not want to take part in this discussion.

“Save me! Save me!” she repeated.

But Fantomas continued to look up.

“No,” he repeated. “Every man for himself. That’s it. I will not turn you over to the police myself, but I will not prevent them from taking you.”

At that moment, on the other side of the door, the authoritarian voice of a police official rang out again.

“You don’t want to open the door? We’ll bash it in... Come on! Once, twice, is that it?”

Fantomas did not appear to have heard.

Now, he was looking at La Toulouche, who, was realizing no doubt that she would not be able to make him take pity on her, and was running about the cabaret like a crazy woman, looking for a way out, looking for a place to hide.

The chaos in the lower room was terrible. The few criminals who had gathered there, had frightened expressions on their faces. Obviously, they all felt that it was a solemn moment, that the battle would be fierce and moreover, brave as they were, they were preparing to pay dearly for their lives.

The large tables had been overturned and the men were kneeling behind them. They held their revolvers and as soon as the police entered they would be welcomed with a volley of shots. Many would die.

La Toulouche, however, who was growing more and more frightened, continued to run about in all directions, like a true mad woman.

Now she was begging Pere Korn.

“Do you know of a hiding place?” she asked. “Show me a way out.”

But Pere Korn remained impassive. He had seen so much, so many brawls break out in his place, he had seen so much, so many police raids, that they no longer moved him.

That evening, however, a flame sparkled in his blinking eyes. Perhaps Pere Korn realized that he was about to witness a drama.

Wasn’t Fantomas in his place? Wasn’t the Master of All and of Everyone about to be captured? Since, in fact, there was no doubt that they were about to capture Fantomas!

Yet, La Toulouche finally had an inspiration. She knelt down quickly, then crawled over to the fireplace and rushed like a mad woman to climb up the narrow chimney.

Unfortunately, La Toulouche was fat...

The miserable woman managed to stuff half her body into the chimney but, since the conduit grew narrower as it rose, she was trapped there, unable to advance or retreat, half suffocated, shrieking abominably....

Outside, the police were still getting organized. Orders rang out.

“Everyone together, eh! One by one! As soon as the door opens, we’ll go in! Shoot everyone who resists!”

“It won’t be long!” said Fantomas.

The bandit, still standing in the middle of the room, was smiling as he examined the chimney in which La Toulouche was already suffering agonies.

“What a pity I don’t have any petrol!” the Master of Fear simply murmured. “I would have enjoyed setting a little fire under that old woman. That would teach her to obey me faithfully!”

Fantomas was still perfectly calm, still peaceful.

Yet, at that very moment, someone approached him respectfully, with such a curious expression, that it was impossible not to take pity.

That person was Bouzille.

Bouzille had a terrible grimace on his face. His old, wrinkled face was torn between fear, hope, anger and deceit. Bouzille held his hat in his hand. He pulled Fantomas by the sleeve.

“Well,” he said.

But Fantomas didn’t even notice him.

So, Bouzille walked around the bandit. He stood in front of him and looked him in the eye.

“Fantomas! Boss! Hey boss!”

Fantomas saw the old man and smiled.

“What do you want, Bouzille?”

“I’d like to leave.”

The answer was simple, but Bouzille was obviously not one for making long speeches in such pressing times.

Moreover, Fantomas did not brush him off.

“Really?” he jeered in a tone that was half pleasant, half ironic. “You'd like to go, Bouzille? And why would that be?”

Bouzille shrugged, saying, “It’s just an idea Fantomas. It’s just an idea that came to me like that... You see, the police are coming and when the cops and I get together, it’s always bad. I have no protection!”

Fantomas did not respond.

Bouzille continued, “When I say that I have no protection, I’m not mistaken of course... I never did anything, Fantomas. So, you are going to protect me. You know, it’s not complicated, what I’m asking, it’s not rocket science. It’s quite simple! I just want to go.”

Fantomas seemed to lose his calm.

“Coward!” he said, looking at Bouzille. “Wouldn’t you rather have a revolver? You don’t like the idea of fighting to protect me? You don’t want to take a shot?”

“No, not at all,” confessed Bouzille.

And the old man insisted, “Hurry up and save me, Fantomas. The door isn’t very solid. Hurry up!”

Then, Fantomas, laughing, grabbed Bouzille by his shoulder.

“Come!” Fantomas said.

It didn’t take Fantomas long to do something quite surprising. On the ground, in a corner of the room, lay gigantic wrapping cloths that must have been used to protect some voluminous packages.

“I’ll tie you up in that,” he said.

And since Bouzille gracefully agreed to the operation, Fantomas did, in fact, wrap Bouzille with the care of a packer wrapping some valuable object. First, he rolled him in the fabric, then he wrapped the bundle in brown paper and finally, he placed a sticker on the outside and tied everything up with rope.

“Bouzille!” Fantomas called out. “Where do you want to go? I’ll indicate the address and leave money on the package.”

Bouzille’s voice, which was a little muffled at that moment, pierced through the thick package.

“Send me to the station, anywhere, to the devil!” Bouzille advised. “I’ll get myself out of the package.”

“Agreed!” said Fantomas.

He wrote an address on the package then pleasantly asked, “Should I send you by registered mail, Bouzille?”

“Of course!” screamed the old man. “I don’t want them dropping 50-kilo trunks on my back!”

Fantomas indicated the instructions.

He was about to walk away when Bouzille once again swore inside the package.

“Fantomas. Hey Fantomas, indicate ‘This side up’, write ‘Fragile’ as well.”

“Which side is ‘This side up’ so I can write ‘This side down’?” Fantomas asked.

But, in response to this suggestion, Bouzille was wriggling about so energetically in his package that Fantomas had to calm him.

“Now, now, be quiet,” he advised. “I’ll take care of everything properly. Listen: I’m writing down a new instruction. I’m putting, ‘Is afraid of humidity. Keep dry!”

“Yet,” said Bouzille. I’m remarkably dry in here.” But that was definitely no time for joking.

The battering ram had just struck the door violently and it looked as if it were about to split.

“Shut up, Bouzille!" ordered Fantomas.

The Master of the Terrible quickly threw himself forward. Fantomas wasn’t one to hang about. As nimble and supple as ever, he leapt in a single bound, without even taking a running start, onto Pere Korn’s counter.

From there, the Criminal Mastermind grabbed the cornice of the ceiling, He pulled himself along it with his arms and, under the terrified eyes of the criminals, he reached the precise portion of the wall that hangs over the door through which the police were about to enter.

The cabaret was filled with a most terrible silence, followed immediately by shouting and shrieking. It was no longer possible to hear the panting of the wretches hiding behind the tables. In the chimney, La Toulouche had fallen silent, no doubt suffocated. And quietly, behind his counter, Pere Korn gently stirred a glass of sugary water, his spoon clinking.

From the depths of his package, Bouzille asked, “Am I postage due or postage paid?”

Then, suddenly, the battering ram struck the door and it gave way.

“Hands up!”

Roaring, shouting in victory, the police rushed into the cabaret.

As always, they were led by the dedicated inspectors of the Surete. Leon and Michel rushed to enjoy the honor to be the first into the danger zone. Unfortunately, their haste to defy the peril was to be fatal for them!

Just as Leon and Michel, side by side, holding their revolvers in their hands, rushed into Pere Korn’s cabaret, racing through the gaping door, just then Fantomas, who was still clinging to the ceiling beams, gathered momentum and performed a formidable feat.

The Master of Fear, the Criminal Mastermind, the Untrappable, threw himself like a tiger onto the two men who were not expecting to be attacked in such a manner...

Leon and Michel somersaulted and rolled on the ground...

They were not to get back up...

Marvelously precise, abominably cruel, Fantomas had just, in the blink of an eye, struck both men down, planting a dagger in the back of their necks, killing the brave servants of law.

It was a moment of mad confusion.

As Leon and Michel remained motionless, half dead, not even having the time to groan, as the thieves were shooting at the police, the officers, in an effort to take vengeance for their comrades, forced their way into the dump, furious.

Now, Fantomas, had remained hunkered down, stretched out on the floor next to Leon and

Michel. He must have guessed that the sight of the two cadavers, would cause the officers to boil in anger. He had guessed that, in order to avenge Leon and Michel, who had been assassinated, all of the police officers would rush into the cabaret as one, prepared for battle.

And Fantomas had counted on that ardent desire!

With marvelous calm in fact, just as all of the officers, swords in hand, revolvers in hand, rushed toward the back of the cabaret to attack the thieves hiding behind the tables, Fantomas, who had remained on the floor next to the cadavers, suddenly stood up.

With a single leap, he reached the door.

“Farewell, Korn!" he shouted.

Then he rushed into the street!

Naturally, it was packed with people. The entire neighborhood was terrified, in fact, by the miserable thieves who usually frequented Pere Korn’s establishment. The announcement of a police raid, of an orderly battle had drawn the entire shadowy population of Goutte-d’Or, La Charboniere and Barbes Boulevard to the scene.

For Fantomas, it was the best possible chance for escape.

“Very well,” he said. “I couldn’t have hoped for better!”

And he dove into the crowd.

In that mixed population, he was certain to receive an almost enthusiastic welcome.

Obviously, no one recognized him, but they did realize that he was running from the police.

The ranks of the curious onlookers opened in front of him. He ran a few yards, then slowed his pace.

The crowd, like an ocean, had swallowed him up. Very calmly, he took his watch from his pocket and looked at the time.

“Well, well. I’ll be late,” he grumbled.

When he reached the Metropolitan, Fantomas hailed a taxi.

“Quick. To the Prefecture... to the police prefecture. Yes, my friend!”

Now, as he was fleeing, the battle inside the cabaret continued. First, the officers dragged Mere Toulouche, who was half suffocated, from the chimney.

That one,” said the Police Commissioner, “That one is good for life!”

The fate of the others was no better,

Many of the thieves had been injured. In the cellar, Oeil-de-Boeuf and Bec-de-Gaz were dead. Stiff in a posture of drunkenness, glasses in their hands.

Pere Korn, for his part, was placed in handcuffs. In vain, he told the police that he was a snitch, that he was on the payroll, and that, as a result, they should let him be.

No one listened to him.

Pere Korn might, at one time, have been protected by the police but he had taken far too much advantage of the situation. They hauled him off.

And following that raid, which was to be burnt into the memories of the neighborhood, only Bouzille escaped, Bouzille who was shivering in the bottom of his package.

No one, in fact, had paid any attention to the package that was left to stand next to the wall. They even paid it so little attention that, two hours later, Bouzille found a way to untie it himself and quietly leave the cabaret.

“Well, well,” murmured Bouzille. “Paris is worth nothing to me. I’d end up catching some disease considering all my adventures! I came to Pantruche to get a look at the Eiffel Tower and, although I only planned to stay six days, I remained here for two years. Well, too bad! I’m going to return to the country!”

And Bouzille, in fact, abandoned his city life that very night. The old tramp was suddenly overtaken with nostalgia for the open road. He left the Parisian sidewalks without any regrets, returning to the fields, with a vague desire to find chickens that would be lingering along the roadside and whose necks he could wring....

As the police were attacking Pere Korn’s establishment, informed just by chance by some snitch about the presence of Oeil-de-Boeuf, Bec-de-Gaz and La Toulouche, no one in the police knew that Fantomas was also there. Meanwhile what had happened to Juve?

Juve was at home. He had been warned that there would be a raid against Pere Korn’s cabaret but, since he had been assured that only minor accomplices would be there, he had not bothered to take part and this was quite fortunate, since the good man would have certainly the same fate as Leon and Michel,

And, since Juve had not rushed over to Rue de la Goutte-d’or, it was moreover because, that day, he had an important commitment that he could not avoid.

Juve, in fact, was rushing to get dressed, putting on his best suit, and then heading over to the Police Prefecture, where he immediately walked into the rooms that had ironically be named the “school” by staff members.

It was, in fact, in these vast rooms that technical courses, courses organized by Mr. Havard, possibly in order to receive some honorific reward, in order to allow the police officers to perfect their art.

Juve, however, was not about to attend a police course!

Fandor’s dedicated friend went to the

Prefecture because he knew full well that, that evening, he would meet some very powerful and important people there.

Fantomas’ most recent crimes, namely the attacks he had carried out and the audacity he had shown in succeeding, were so outrageous that they had created a strong wave of public opinion and that wave would eventually produce practical results of the greatest interest.

Fantomas had attacked almost all of the countries in the world; he had committed his misdeeds under the most diverse skies, he had covered his trail with blood, throughout the most distant lands, and all of the countries were now joining forces, in their fear.

Russia, England, Germany, Switzerland, the United States, Brazil, Italy, Spain, Portugal, all of these countries had delegated their chiefs of police to meet under Juve’s chairmanship, to study the measures to be taken to finally put Fantomas out of action.

For Juve, this police gathering was very important.

Since Fantomas was an international criminal, international measures would be required. And that is why Juve was congratulating himself on having organized this vast police movement, which might result in, which should result in the arrest, once and for all, of the Master of Fear.

When he arrived at the Prefecture, Juve found all of the individuals delegated by the various states on site.

The meeting commenced immediately.

Juve who, naturally, chaired the meeting, since he was the only police officer who could speak about Fantomas in an informed manner, Juve started his explanations.

He provided a description of Fantomas, he described his tricks, his audacity and he concluded his short speech with this simple remark: “Gentleman, Fantomas is the Proteus of the modern world! He can take on any face and any shape he likes. The reason the police have so much difficulty conquering him is precisely because he is so skilled at disguise, at making himself unrecognizable.”

“Yet, over the course of my long career, gentlemen, I have been able to get close enough to this terrifying and legendary individual that I have been able to prepare a description that will enable us to at least try to identify him.”

Juve paused, then started speaking again, his voice tinged with triumph, “With the cooperation of several artists and by using photographic techniques which are now available to us, I have been able to do something which I believe, gentlemen, will be of great use to you.”

“I have the honor of showing you cinematographic shots that represent Fantomas accurately enough that you will most certainly believe that he actually served as a model for making them.”

Juve clapped his hands, darkness fell, and a projector lit up a gigantic white screen located at the back of the room.

Juve had come up with an incredible idea when preparing these movie strips.

It was obvious, in fact, that it was not Fantomas who had been filmed. Yet, as Juve had said, the police were using techniques that were good enough to create a perfect illusion.

Those who wanted to see Fantomas projected onto the screen could be led into error, could believe that they were actually seeing the veritable Master of Fear.

“Roll!” said Juve.

The participants heard the crackling of the projector. At that every moment, moreover, on the white screen, a silhouette stood out.

On the screen, the animated projection had started. And, no doubt in an effort to make it all the more striking, the projection started simply, with Fantomas’ silhouette.

Oh! That gloomy silhouette, that black silhouette of a man wearing a mask, swallowed up in a black suit, wearing black gloves, black shoes.

Oh! That legendary and tragic silhouette, that silhouette which had been dictating his own law to the world for 20 years, intangible, unattainable, always driving back the boundaries of ferocity and horror!

When the participants saw that silhouette, they uttered a collective “ah!” in amazement.

Yet, at the very moment, Juve’s nervous voice rose out in the darkness of the room.

“Paul” the policeman shouted, calling the projectionist. “What is that shot? Where is it coming from?”

Juve did not recognize the projection!

Fantomas’ silhouette, however, turned slowly. It was as if the legendary apparition, dressed all in black, was enjoying the participants’ admiration!

On the white screen the silhouette stood out perfectly. Slowly, very slowly, it turned then came to a stop.

“What is that projection? Where did this film come from?” Juve continued to ask. “Answer me, Paul!”

But the operator did not answer...

Juve stood up.

“That’s it...” he started to say.

He did not have time to complete his sentence.

The black silhouette stood away from the screen suddenly, holding out its arms.

A hoarse voice shrieked, “You want to project a movie about me, Juve? Go ahead. A trick worthy of you! I’ve come in person.”

Shots rang out.

People cried out in anger, in pain.

Juve leapt forward.

“Fantomas! Fantomas!” he shrieked. “It’s Fantomas in person.”

It was Fantomas who, driving back the boundaries of audacity, had slipped into the Police Prefecture and, in the luminous halo of the projector, had stood in front of the participants.

It was Fantomas who had just taunted Juve, it was Fantomas who was discharging his revolver at the participants at random. It was Fantomas who, now, slashed the screen with a dagger and then quickly fled.

Juve would arrive too late to block his way.

Mad panic washed over the participants when, after a terrible struggle that lasted a few moments, Juve finally managed to turn on the light and was able to see, unfortunately, face pale, and know that, once again, the Master of Fate had left a bloody trail behind him.

The projectionist, Paul, lay in his projection booth, his throat slashed, and four participants moaned, struck by the Criminal Mastermind’s bullets...



CHAPTER XXI - A Great Ship



“Would you like some coffee?”

“Three times rather than two, Juve.”

The policeman smiled at that exclamation, then motioned at his elderly servant, Jean, who immediately filled Fandor’s empty cup.

Juve turned to Helene, who was seated next to him, and asked with a smile, “The smoke isn’t bothering you, madam?”

With a gracious gesture, the young woman replied that, on the contrary, she loved tobacco smoke and that she might even smoke a cigarette herself.

And Juve, pleased with the pure permission given to him, hastily dug through his tobacco pouch.

The three friends were enjoying breakfast together in the small apartment on the Rue Tardieu, where the policeman had settled after the terrible fire, set by Fantomas, in the building on Rue Bonaparte, had destroyed Juve’s former home.

The three friends, who had breakfasted peacefully, were pleased to find themselves in this intimate tete-a-tete. They never mentioned his name, moreover, without emotion, since, although they occasionally commented on their adventures with good humor and enjoyment, they could not help but recall that each step of their adventurous existence, each event in their battle with Fantomas, their implacable adversary, had always been marked by some misfortune, some crime, some murder.

And, as they evoked those memories, their expressions grew darker, their eyes grew wild.

But Juve, making an effort and obviously not wanting that day to bring up sad thoughts, cheerfully scolded Helene and Fandor.

“Come on! Come on!” he said. “You certainly didn’t come here to act like you’re going to a funeral. What the devil. You’re both young, you adore one another, you’re made for one another and, within a few days your wedding, which was interrupted the first time by procedural matters, will be celebrated and you will finally be at peace...”

Juve held Helene’s hand and asked, “So, what are you going to do? What are your projects?”

“Good grief, I don’t really know, Juve,” Helene replied, blushing, “I think we’ll find ourselves a quiet little place and spend a few happy days there. Fontainebleau, Versailles...”

“In your place,” declared Juve, “I would go to Versailles. Versailles with its grandiose gardens, with its large, beautiful boulevards that are always deserted and where you never meet anyone in an inopportune manner, is undeniably charming.”

Helene made a vague movement with her hand, saying that she didn’t have a strong opinion, implying that it didn’t really matter as long as she was with Fandor.

Maliciously, she added, “I’d go anywhere, but Fandor, I believe, is particularly fond of Fontainebleau.”

“Ah!” said Juve, bursting into laughter. “You’re already obeying your monstrous husband. You poor women, you always have somebody bossing you around...”

Fandor accepted the joke.

“The fact is,” he declared, looking at Helene. “The fact is that I intend, once we’re definitively married, this time, to behave like a tyrant towards my wife .”

“I’m counting on that!" said Helene. “It will be one of those tyrannies people love.”

And, spontaneously she stood up, to go and kiss Fandor.

Juve protested, “And what about me?”

Helene turned toward him and clasped him by the neck. The policeman sighed.

“Finally, it will happen and not a bit too soon. You will finally be tranquil and happy, my children. I swear that pleases me greatly.”

Fandor, who seemed curiously astonished by Juve’s attitude for the past few minutes, finally asked “And you? What will happen to you? Will you come to join us in the country?”

“Of course!” replied the policeman.

“When?" insisted Helene.

Juve looked evasive and said, “I have a few small matters to settle, unimportant matters, the time it will take, purely for form’s sake since no one will refuse me, to ask my superior for permission, and then I’ll join you.”

There was a moment’s silence and then, no longer able to contain himself, Fandor asked, “Look Juve, what does that mean? You invited us to breakfast, you wanted to celebrate with a small, intimate party, which we find most pleasing, moreover, the definitive retour of my beloved Helene to health, you strongly urged us to leave for the country as soon as the formalities of our marriage are settled and that is all fine and well...”

“On the other hand, you have announced that you will be joining us. That’s even better and we’re delighted... But, finally, it seems that there is a matter we haven’t discussed yet and it seems to be rather unimportant, someone we should not be worried about and who, however, holds a certain place in our lives!”

Fandor fell silent, then looking Juve straight in the eyes, he said, “Fantomas!”

“Well, what about Fantomas?” Juve asked, lighting a new cigarette,

Helene grew upset. She could never hear Fantomas’ name with shivering.

She asked questions in turn.

The policeman frowned.

“Well, what about Fantomas,” he said in a rogue voice. “We certainly have to hope than we will be finished with him in a short while and that moment will not be late in coming.”

Helene and Fandor were perfectly aware that Fantomas’ most recent escapade had vexed Juve considerably and they could not admit that the policemen would be prepared to give up his hunt for Fantomas, who he had pursued for so long.

Yet, it appeared during the course of this breakfast, that Juve was making plans which did not include the active and rigorous search for the terrible bandit.

Fandor and Helene could not accept that and, if Juve appeared indifferent, disinterested in what Fantomas was up to, that obviously meant that he had some hidden, secret plan that he did not want to disclose, even to his best friends.

Juve felt, however, as a result of the questions the pair asked him, that he had to satisfy their curiosity.

“Fantomas,” said Juve. “Fantomas is certainly in a very perilous situation at this very minute. I told you about the nasty trick he played recently. But that’s just one more misdeed that will not bring him happiness.”

“His audacious act merely exasperated the entire Surete staff even further and people not only in France but elsewhere around the world are determined to do everything they have to in order to capture him!”

Juve then explained the details of the formidable organization he had helped set up.

The Surete had been given an enormous budget and all of the police, the agents, the peace officers, the entire gendarmerie and all of the services of the Surete Generale were on standby. Even the customs officers had been given formal instructions. All police forces everywhere had been mobilized. He was absolutely certain that, at this time, Fantomas had been unable to leave France, since his descriptions, all of them, had been posted everywhere and all of the major routes, borders, boundaries were being watched so closely he could not cross them.

Even the freight trains traveling from one country to another were being watched and specific instructions had been given throughout Europe to inspect balloons when they landed.

“Fantomas cannot avoid capture!" concluded Juve. “It's our turn. I can feel it. It’s just a matter of days, of hours.”

“And what will we do in all this?” Fandor asked.

Juve looked at him for a moment, then said, “You will do nothing, Fandor. You will marry Helene, that’s your right, that’s your duty. You have both earned your happiness. Life is short and you have to make the most of it. As for me,

I will do very little. I will remain here, at my station, like a general centralizing information at a specific location, without actually taking part in the battle since he has to direct it.”

Fandor nodded his head and was about to object that Juve’s new attitude did not seem to fit in well with the attitude the policeman had always adopted up to this point, when the elderly Jean entered the dining room, followed by a young man whom he introduced to his master.

“The gentleman comes from the Transatlantic Company,” he declared.

“Fine!” said Juve who immediately left the dining room, taking the company employee into his office.

Helene and Fandor looked at one another, dumbfounded, disturbed by their friend’s attitude.

“He’s hiding something from us. That’s for certain,” said Helene.

“Yes,” said Fandor. “Juve obviously has a plan that he is hiding from us and I wonder why...”

“Oh, that’s simple,” said the young woman. “That’s very simple to understand. Juve is so good, that he wants to avoid any little problems and slightest danger for us. He wants us finally to be happy and peaceful and he will assume full responsibility for the battle, for the risks, himself.”

Fandor moved closer to Helene and looked her tenderly in the eyes.

“Will we allow him to, Helene?” he asked.

Helene, frankly, without the shadow of a hesitation, shook her head.

“We will not allow him,” she declared. “We both have to be Juve’s accomplices, his assistants, until the end.”

“Excuse me,” sighed Fandor. “Juve and I, fine. But you, Helene? I would be so happy if you would promise to give up your projects and if I could know for certain that you would not try to fight Fantomas...”

Helene was looking at Fandor, with an expression filled with reproach.

“How can you ask me something like that. I would be so ashamed to stay behind, safe, while you would be in danger.”

As the two future spouses were taking part in this generous battle, Juve was in his office questioning the employee from the Transatlantic Company.

“This new ship, sir,” said the policeman. “This new ship which will be making its first trip from Le Havre to New York, and which will set out tomorrow, this new ship is a true marvel? It can compete, in all respects, with the enormous floating islands of the English and German lines?”

Yes sir,” said the employee. The Gigantic, which we will keep armed for its first crossing, is certainly one of the most beautiful ships it is possible to imagine. It measures 250 yards long, rises up to 80 feet above the water line and includes facilities for close to 5,000 people, both passengers and employees. It carries an entire world in its enormous iron shell.”

Juve smoked another cigarette,

“The Gigantic'" he repeated. “That’s a fine name. That ship is extraordinary.”

The policeman seemed to be very interested in the details the Transatlantic Company employee was providing.

“Naturally,” insisted Juve. “People from the world of fashion and high society are concerned with the first crossing of the Gigantic. I’ve

already been shown the first lists of passengers. It includes some very fancy people, Argentinians, Americans, people from the best circles...”

“That’s true,” acknowledged the employee. “I can assure you that you have to be rather wealthy to pay for that type of crossing, particularly those who want the deluxe apartments!”

“Really?” said Juve. “What are the deluxe apartments like?”

“They are actual apartments, sir... with an antechamber, salon, boudoir, one or two bedrooms, washroom, bathroom, dining room and private kitchen, of course.”

“And they cost?” asked Juve.

“The most modest of these apartments costs 1,000 francs per day.”

“And the most expensive?" asked the policeman.

“The most expensive is rented, for a lump sum, for the entire crossing, of 30,000 francs!”

“Imagine that!” shouted the policeman. “And have you found a taker?”

“We’ve had ten requests,” said the employee. “There’s no shortage of clients!”

Then Juve asked, “And who is the lucky taker?”

“Well,” said the Transatlantic Company employee, “I’d very much like to tell you, but I don’t know.”

“The passenger did not provide his name?"

“He did not provide his name, sir. He paid in advance, by registered mail, then five or six days later we received stacks and stacks of crates and suitcases that we’ve stored in the hold and which are all designated as being reserved for the passenger who will be taking Apartment No. 1. That’s how we refer to the renter of the 30,000-franc apartment.”

“Ah!” said Juve. “You don’t have any details about him?”

“No details, sir.”

“Do you know if he will be traveling alone or accompanied by relatives, family members or servants?”

“We know absolutely nothing. But that doesn’t surprise us terribly. We carry a highly-varied clientele on our ships. Frequently princes, people of royal blood coming back from trips abroad, hide their real names and want to travel incognito. Under other circumstances, famous people don’t want to reveal their names, imagining as they do that everyone is watching them, which many people do not enjoy. Naturally, we respect the clients’ wishes, particularly in the case of a client who pays a great deal.”

“And you’re right!” said Juve.

The Company employee stood up. Juve was accompanying him to the door when the employee gave him a card bearing this name, handwritten.

“Mr. Juve, you asked for permission to visit the Gigantic before it departs. We chatted so long that I almost forgot to give it to you.”

“And, yet that’s the most important matter,” said Juve.

Then the policeman asked, “When can I visit?”

“Starting today, sir and, with special authorization, you can stay on board until next Friday, at noon, at which time the Gigantic will leave Le Havre and head for America. The other visitors will be sent off by boat on Thursday evening, to make room for the passengers. The special train from Paris arrives on Friday morning. But, exceptionally, you will be able to remain on board until the Gigantic sets off...”

“Please thank the company gentlemen on my behalf,” Juve said. “You can tell them that I appreciate the authorization they have given me.”

But the employee protested, saying “The honor is ours, Mr. Juve. And I know that these gentlemen are particularly flattered that the famous police inspector, Juve, is interested in the Gigantic*”

The Transatlantic Company employee had not been exaggerating when, in eloquent and warm terms, he had, two days earlier, informed Juve that the Gigantic, the new boat the company was putting into service, was certainly the most magnificent ship that could be imagined.

The Gigantic was, in fact, as large as the largest ships of the company’s foreign competitors. But, moreover, the facilities inside were not only sumptuous and comfortable, but they had been arranged with perfect taste, extreme care, that caused delicate and dilettante tongues to say that, undoubtedly, only in France were people so distinguished.

For the past two days, the many people authorized by the Transatlantic Company had been strolling about the immense ship, poking about everywhere, from the deepest holds to the highest deck and everyone was constantly amazed, crying out in surprise and admiration.

The first-class dining room and the deluxe cabins caught everyone’s attention, drawing the most admiring and flattering comments.

It was like being in a sumptuous restaurant on the Champs-Elysees or on Parisian boulevards. The ceiling was 25 feet-high and the room was deliciously airy and flooded with electric lighting when evening fell. People could dine there at small tables. A gypsy orchestra occupied a special place in a corner of the room and the meals were served by admirably well-dressed staff, butlers and waiters.

The visitors on the ship included a well-shaved man, wearing a soft felt hat pulled down low over his eyes, wrapped in a large gray cape. This individual, whose attire and silhouette did not go unnoticed, since he stood out from the common crowd as a result of his energetic and martial style, paid particular attention when touring the ship.

He noticed the thousands of tiny details of the inner facilities that were of no interest to the other visitors and he had hired the services of a servant to guide him, as he constantly asked questions.

“This small staircase connects the kitchens to the office, doesn’t it?”

“Yes sir.”

“And this elevator, where does it leave from and where does it go to? What is the maximum weight it can carry?"

They visited the cabins and the mysterious individual asked about the thickness of the walls and the dimensions of the trunks placed under the bunks.

He checked inside washrooms, he asked if the bathtubs were fixed, namely he took an interest in a great many things that seemed to be completely unimportant.

That man was Juve.

After his meeting with the Transatlantic Company employee, who had come to Rue Tardieu to bring him authorization to visit the

Gigantic, Juve had quickly taken leave of Helene and Fandor, promising that he would join them soon, and headed that same evening to Le Havre.

The police had requested permission to visit the company’s new ship, saying that he did so out of simple curiosity, a desire to learn more, although he did have another idea in mind.

As the train was steaming to Le Havre, Juve continued to think and convinced himself that it was a good idea to get close to the Gigantic.

Thus, as he had informed Helene and Fandor, the surveillance circle was tightening in around Fantomas.

The police services were organized in a rational matter and it could safely be said that Fantomas

He reached out his hand.

Juve hesitated for a second, then the frightful cataclysm, the dreadful rush arrived. The two men rolled, jostled, rushed by an invincible force, into the darkness, into the shadows...

An abyss had opened under the thrust of the Gigantic as it slid into the water. Then the ocean covered the formidable wreck with a blanket of gray, still water, in which a few ice bergs floated, on their way down into the polar oceans, reflecting the silvery rays of the pale moon.

In the distance, a white line emerged from the fog. The sun was rising... the rooms, a few masterpieces were hung on the walls. Superb, sumptuous carpets covered the floor. Everything was magnificent.

Despite the appeal of the apartment, Juve had concentrated his attention on a room next to the apartment which should have only been moderately interesting. It was the baggage room. A considerable number of suitcases and crates belonging to the mysterious stranger who had rented the apartment for 30,000 francs had been stored there. Juve examined these crates and suitcases closely, noting their shape, weighing them, wondering what they could contain. Most bore labels indicating the places from which they had been sent. And they came from the most varied of locations. Some came from Spain, others from Russia, some from England. Some had even been brought over from New York, on a previous crossing, and Juve found this all more and more surprising.

“What can this mean” he wondered. “What is being hidden here?"

Perplexed, Juve left the ship with the visitors on Thursday evening. Then, since he had been given special authorization, he returned to it the next morning and watched the passengers, who had been brought by a special train from Paris, board the Gigantic, which was to hoist anchor at noon.

The weather was magnificent. The sea shone bright blue in the distance, an exquisite, fresh breeze caresses the faces of the passengers, making flags and banners flutter.

The ship bustled with activity during the final hours prior to the departure. The Gigantic's four enormous smokestacks released large clouds of black smoke, which dissipated in the blue sky. While the enormous floating island was still moored to the wharf, life on board was already starting.

Ship staff came and went, busily making sure that the passengers had been settled in where they were supposed to be. As soon as people went down into the ship, heading for the dining room, they could hear, amidst the clinking of plates and dishes, the plaintiff accents of the violins the gypsies were tuning as they waited for the meal to start. The hallways were filled with passengers perpetually coming and going, wearing colorful hats and clothing, pretty young American girls, elegant French women. And everyone was talking excitedly.

From one end to the other of the floating city, from top to bottom, the scene was filled with uninterrupted movement, like an anthill.

Juve moved through this world, mingling with the passengers, going unnoticed.

Suddenly, a long whistle sounded, plaintive and hoarse, for 30 seconds. It was the first signal announcing the ship’s imminent departure. People were filled with emotion at the thought that soon the ropes would be cast off, the gangways would be withdrawn and the Gigantic, released from its chains, would start its first trip, its first crossing to America.

Juve walked over to a crew member he knew since they had previously worked for the police, a man who was employed in the company’s offices in Le Havre. He was specifically responsible for the passengers.

“Well, Martin,” Juve said, clapping the other man on the shoulder. “Will your ship be setting out in 30 minutes?”

“Of course,” the employee. “That is, unless it doesn’t...”

“Bah!” said Juve. “What’s up?”

“Nothing or very little!" continued Martin. “But they are still hesitating to give the signal to depart at the required time. We’re missing a passenger...”

Bah!” said Juve, laughing. “And they would make 3,000 passengers wait for a single late individual?”

“It’s no ordinary passenger,’ said Martin, murmuring in Juve’s ear. “It’s the mysterious stranger who reserved Apartment No. 1.”

Juve was already aware that the passenger in Apartment No. 1 had not yet made his appearance. He also knew that the company was confused and did not know if they should give the signal to depart. Yet, he pretended to know nothing and questioned Martin.

“So, the passenger in Apartment No. 1 is someone important?”

“No one knows,” said Martin. “They think... They suppose that it might be some sovereign who is traveling incognito, or some important person on an official mission...”

“There’s been no news of him?” asked Juve.

“Absolutely none.”

Juve walked away from Martin and over to the ship’s railing. Bit by bit, he realized that amazement was washing over the passengers. It was five minutes before noon, the sea was high and it was a propitious moment to set out.

Yet, the second whistle, which was to be blown fifteen minutes before the departure time, had still not been blown and it seemed as if no one were preparing to cast off the ropes. The tug responsible for taking the ship out past the piers had not even taken up its position!

A few first-class passengers started to complain.

Small groups of people formed around the ship’s officers.

“Is there some mechanical problem?”

“What’s the reason for the delay?”

“Is there a storm at sea?”

The most extraordinary hypotheses were being formulated. In some groups, which were better informed than others, people were starting to speak what seemed to be the truth, that they were waiting for someone. The passengers seemed to find this unlikely at first, then grew indignant and started to complain.

It was impossible! A transatlantic ship doesn’t wait for a single passenger, even a passenger who paid 30,000 francs for his berth! The most unlikely rumors spread.

Juve was starting to wonder what exactly was happening and the policeman seemed to be quite upset, quite disturbed.

Had he discovered something?

Juve went to see Martin again. It was ten minutes after noon.

“Well!" he said. “What’s happening?”

The other man replied, “The latest news is that they’ve decided to postpone the departure by two hours.”

“That is extraordinary,” exclaimed Juve.

“Here’s why,” said the employee. “We’re waiting for the arrival, at 1:35 this afternoon, of a rapid connection with the Nord-Express. They presume, although I don’t know why, that perhaps the passenger from Apartment No. 1 is on that train. If that is the case, he will be on board in two hours and we’ll leave with him.”

“What if he isn’t on board?”

“Then we’ll leave anyway,” continued Martin. The ship can’t wait any longer, there’s the matter

of the tide, the postal service, the wharf that we’re blocking and tying up, all the expenses that entails... And to top it off, we’ll have to make up for the two hours we’ve lost, which isn’t all that easy.”

The expression on Juve’s face was most perplexed and he asked, “In any case, Martin, are you certain that the ship won’t leave for another two hours?”

The employee smiled, “That’s what I’m telling you Mr. Juve. Plus, they’re posting signs on the deck.”

Juve ascertained that Martin had been telling the truth and quickly noticed that along the walls of the cabins, in narrow racks provided for

that purpose, crew members were posting small, hand-written signs announcing that the Gigantic would depart at two o’clock rather than noon.

A few passengers murmured and then everyone quickly forgot this setback. They had so much to do to get settled in. Everyone went back to their own activities, no longer concerned about the delay.

Meanwhile, Juve had disappeared. Time was passing. At fifteen minutes before the departure time, the final whistle blew in the midst of general emotion. Workers started to remove the ropes holding the sea giant to the wharf.

As the dock workers were about to remove the final gangway, porters came running, some of them carrying large white crates on which “Apartment No. 1” was painted in white.

When the passengers saw them, and realized that the departure of the ship was about to be delayed yet again, they started to murmur.

Once again, this luxury client was making the Gigantic late! Who could that passenger be?



CHAPTER XXII - Apartment No. 1



While the final preparations for the departure were being made and the Gigantic, whose formidable equipment was being powered up, was waiting for a signal that was late in coming, Juve had suddenly left the increasingly packed deck of the colossal floating city.

Before going down to the wharf, the policeman first took great pains to make sure that the departure of the Gigantic had actually been delayed by two hours.

He had confirmed this matter in the most precise manner, as if he considered it to be very important. Then, when he set foot on the wharf he spied an automobile taxi, waved at the driver and gave him the address for a business street in the heart of the city.

A few moments later, Juve arrived at a carpentry shop. He got out of the car, murmured a few words to the taxi driver and slipped him a 20-franc bill.

The vehicle did not go anywhere. Instead, it parked along the sidewalk. The driver turned his motor off and waited.

Juve went into the carpentry shop, which served primarily as a packing firm.

Pere Antoine, that was the name of the honorable merchant, had a vast workshop where mechanical saws snored constantly, cutting planks of work and spreading clouds of sawdust everywhere. The ground was littered with chips and stacks of crates of all sizes, made of all kinds of wood, stood along the walls, some open, others lined with waterproof fabric or even zinc.

Juve walked over to the small office occupied by Pere Antoine, a brave old man with curly gray hair, wearing gold-rimmed glasses.

“Do I have the honor of addressing Mr. Antoine?" Juve asked.

“Himself,” the carpenter said, looking up.

“Well,” said Juve. “I’m pleased to make your acquaintance. I’d like a word with you.”

And, Juve took the other man aside so that the young apprentice who was standing next to the boss could not overhear the conversation. And he started to question Pere Antoine, who was somewhat surprised by this introduction.

“You are a most enterprising man... A man who knows his business and can do something extraordinary in the shortest amount of time possible?”

Pere Antoine looked at the policeman, with a certain amount of distrust, and replied, “It all depends, of course, on the work I’m asked to do and the price one is willing to pay!”

Juve understood.

“The work is not complicated!" he said. “And I won’t question the bill. The important thing is that it must be done quickly!”

Pere Antoine, no doubt with a certain amount of irony, observed, “I’d like to point out, sir, that you have already spent five minutes here and you haven’t said what you want.”

“That’s so!” replied Juve, who did not appreciate such observations. “But I haven’t been wasting my time here.”

He then pointed at a large crate, lined with waterproof fabric, which a laborer was placing along a wall in the workshop.

“That’s what I need,” he said. “And while I was making your acquaintance, Mr. Antoine, I was looking all about me, observing the contents of your shop, looking for a crate that would be suitable for me. There it is! How much does it cost?”

“But,” said Pere Antoine. “It's not for sale. I was given an order for it yesterday.”

“What does it cost?” insisted Juve. “I want it immediately!”

“One hundred and fifty francs,” Pere Antoine replied.

“Perfect!” declared Juve. “Here’s the money!”

He took three bank notes out of his pocket and handed them to Pere Antoine, who declared, “But you’ve given me 300 francs...”

“I know that!" said Juve. “One hundred and fifty for the crate and one hundred and fifty for packing and shipping. And for the instructions to be written on the crate as well.”

“Where does it need to be taken? What do I have to pack in it?” asked Pere Antoine.

Juve continued, “This crate must be loaded in the taxi you see out in the street and it must be accompanied to the Gigantic, which will be leaving in an hour for New York. You will have the crate placed in Apartment No. 1.”

“Fine,” said Pere Antoine. “That’s possible. But what are we to pack in the crate?”

Once again, Juve took Pere Antoine aside.

“Don’t you have another place apart from the shop which is open to everyone?”

“Yes,” replied the carpenter. There’s the storeroom in back.”

“Well, let’s go to the storeroom,” replied Juve. “Then I’ll tell you what is to be placed in the crate.”

“What’s the reason for all this?” asked Pere Antoine.

“You’ll see,” replied Juve.

When the two men had gone into what Pere Antoine called the storeroom and Juve found himself alone with the carpenter, when the large crate lined with waterproof fabric had been brought to the room and placed on the floor there, Juve, staring into the clear and honest eyes of the dumbfounded carpenter, said, “It’s quite simple what you are going to place in the crate... is a man... a living man...”

“Ah! But I can’t,” protested the carpenter. “That would be too much. I don’t want to get involved...”

Juve insisted, “That living man that you are going to place in this crate will not object at all to being packaged up in that manner.”

“What do you know?” asked the carpenter.

“I know,” continued Juve, “I know, because that man is me.”

This time, Pere Antoine was completely dumbfounded. He looked at Juve, then at the door. Suddenly he felt as if he were dealing with a mad man or some criminal.

“No, no,” he grumbled. “That doesn’t work for me. This is shady business!”

Juve grew excited. Time was passing. He took another bank note from his pocket.

“Here are another five louis,” he said.

But the noble carpenter replied, “Not even for 1000 francs!”

“So,” continued Juve. “It’s all for nothing. It would be to my advantage to make my identity known to you, Mr. Antoine. I’m Inspector Juve, from the Surete de Paris. Here’s my ID card. Do I have to get a warrant from the Police Commissioner to get you to obey my order?”

The carpenter gradually grew more reassured.

“Ah! You’re inspector Juve!” he said. “Yes, yes, I know the name and, no doubt, you’re working on something to catch some criminal or thief, perhaps even Fantomas? Aren’t you the one who’s chasing after Fantomas?”

“That isn’t important for you!” replied Juve. “Hurry up and pack me in the crate!”

“Oh! But not like that,” shouted Pere Antoine. “What if something were to happen to you... I need a paper, a paper written by you, discharging me of any responsibility!”

Juve was stamping his feet in anger. Time was passing and nothing was getting accomplished. Yet, he was fully aware that Pere Antoine would obey him if he gave the other man a paper, just as the carpenter asked. So, Juve hastily scribbled a few words on a sheet of paper and gave it to Pere Antoine and then immediately settled in the crate, as he gave the other man his final instructions.

“Hurry up and nail on the lid. But, before that, place a chisel and pliers in the crate so that I can free myself whenever I want to!"

“One other thing: it is understood that you will personally accompany the crate and place it in Apartment No. 1. I’ve given you authorization from the Transatlantic Company to put this crate in the place I have indicated to you. Do whatever it takes. Don’t forget that I will be watching you and will be able to hear you!"

Juve had finally overcome Pere Antoine’s scruples and, a half hour later, just as the last gangplank connecting the Gigantic to the wharf was being removed, an automobile taxi raced toward the ship, carrying a large, white crate on which the following words had been painted in black: "Gigantic, Apartment No. 1.”

Pere Antoine, his apprentice and his righthand man, assisted by the taxi driver then loaded the crate onto their shoulders and carried it onto the transatlantic ship.

“Hurry up to get on and off the ship,” people shouted at them. “We’re waiting on you to give the signal to depart!”

On the deck of the transatlantic ship, the later arrivers were being hustled and shoved. They had to argue with the ship’s officers who did not want to let them pass, but Pere Antoine, who heard Juve shouting inside the crater, “Don’t give up! Tell him that crate is for Apartment No. 1!” obeyed the policeman scrupulously.

And, in fact, once he mentioned Apartment No. One, all of the rules were lifted and the most rigorous orders were waved. The crate went through, along with those carrying it, and was placed in the apartment. Five minutes later, Pere Antoine found himself back on the wharf. He let his employees set out in the taxi and he returned to his shop by foot.

Pere Antoine was very satisfied that he had earned 300 francs, plus a tip of 100 francs in the space of an hour. Yet, he was worried, unsettled, wondering if the entire situation would turn against him.

Of course, he realized that he had been dealing with the veritable policeman, Juve, that he had a proper paper, relieving him from any responsibility, but still he was a little concerned that he had locked a man up in a crate and placed that crate in a luxurious apartment on a transatlantic ship!

Pere Antoine wondered what Juve’s intentions were, saying “When people get caught up in tricks like that, it means they’re up to no good!”

Pere Antoine left the port and was about to return to his shop when someone tapped him on the shoulder. He turned around suddenly.

“Well, Mr. Chariot,” he said.

And Pere Antoine automatically shook the hand of the other individual.

The man who had just approached the carpenter, who was called Mr. Chariot, was his colleague or his competitor, the packer who worked on the wharf, opposite the theater. Pere Antoine and Mr. Chariot were not on bad terms, both having a good clientele and earning good livings. From time to time, they would help one another, sending clients to one another, acting more like colleagues than competitors.

“So,” asked Mr. Chariot. “Is business good?”

“It's fine,” replied Pere Antoine, thinking complacently about the 400 francs he had earned in less than thirty minutes.

“In fact, business is going quite well,” he said, implying that he must have discovered a remarkable way of growing rich.

Mr. Chariot was not jealous.

“Well,” he said. “So much the better, I'm pleased to see you happy, Pere Antoine, since I’ve just completed a nice little deal myself. I just earned a large sum without having to do much of anything.”

“Really!” said Pere Antoine. “How?”

Mr. Chariot placed a finger on his lips. Then, taking his colleague by the arm, he pulled him into a cabaret.

“Let’s drink a bottle of cider,” he said. “I’ll tell you everything while we drink. Only, we must be discreet. The situation seems a little shady to me... But, when clients pay with good money, there’s no need to know any more than the client wants to say!”

And then, Mr. Chariot told Pere Antoine, who listened very attentively, about the profitable situation that had just occurred.

Someone had come into his shop, two or three hours ago, who had initially asked for an immense crate, one large enough to hold a man’s body. Naturally, Chariot complained, saying that that was not his type of business, that the client would have to go elsewhere for a coffin... But the man told him that the crate was for himself, that he wanted to be locked up in it since he intended to travel in that manner. He claimed to be an eccentric and that his physician had recommended lying on planks of wood.

“And you agreed to place him in that crate,” Pere Antoine asked, interrupting.

Chariot replied, “I tell you that he paid me 200 francs for that!”

Antoine’s expression grew mysterious.

“I’m going to tell you what you did with the crate. You carried it one board the Gigantic and your placed it in Apartment No. 1, in the back of a small parlor to the right, behind a sofa?”

Mr. Chariot was dumbfounded. His eyes grew round in surprise.

“How did you know that?” he asked

Pere Antoine hesitated a moment before speaking, then decided that it was the best thing to do, that it would be better not to hide what he had done, particularly from a colleague, and he confided, “I know because I saw it done. I brought a man in a crate on board the Gigantic too!”

And he recounted Juve’s visit.

“Only,” he concluded, “I was more cunning than you were since I earned 400 francs.”

But Chariot was not thinking about that.

“Well, good grief!” he said. “Good grief! Good grief! I believe that we have both done some very strange work... Because, Pere Antoine, if you locked the policeman in the crate, then I suppose my client must be the bandit everyone is looking for ... What will those two men get up to on board the Gigantic?”

Philosophically, Pere Antoine declared, “We know nothing about that and we can do nothing about that. Moreover, there’s no reason to be bitter, we both got paid, didn’t we?”

In order to calm their emotions, the two men drank another bottle of cider, then peacefully returned to their respective stores.

Two hours earlier, the tugboat that was responsible for guiding the transatlantic ship into open water had abandoned it and the Gigantic, whose engineers had been set to work, was starting its trip at a dizzying speed, across the Atlantic Ocean.

The superb ship quickly disappeared off the horizon and plunged into the grayish fog of a cloud-filled sky that merged with the dreary sea. There was a small swell, a short, jerky swell as is common on the English Channel.

Yet, the passengers on board the Gigantic did not seem overly affected by the condition of the sea, which did not rock the enormous ship much.

The ship gradually accelerated.

The engines had been set to the maximum as soon as the ship departed, not only to test the boilers, which was a good thing to do while the ship was still close to shore in the event that problems occurred, but also to make up for lost time.

In fact, the ship had set out two hours late and the man at the helm of the transatlantic ship, Captain Blancart, was making it a point of honor to make up for the delay within a day or two. The passengers settled into their cabins or their apartments.

A few phlegmatic Americans had already taken possession of the bar and were sampling iced drinks and smoking enormous cigars while most of the passengers who had finished unpacking, were walking about on the ship, filled with curiosity, hoping to make themselves familiar with the facilities that were completely new to them on the luxurious transatlantic ship that carried them off.

People jostled one another, met unexpectedly, everywhere, on the decks, in the stairwells, in the hallways. Heads peeked through half open doors, amazed, crying out in surprise, when they saw the marvelous exercise room, the fresh water swimming pool where people could swim 30-yard lengths, the tennis court. They found the gypsies in their red vests, their violins under their arms curious as they returned to the tea room, waiting for dinner time, when they would perform in the restaurant.

The general hustle and bustle mingled with the feverish activity of the porters and servants, coming and going with suitcases and bags.

Finally, at times, the whistle blew loudly, making the ship tremble, warning other ships in the distance of its arrival.

The Gigantic sailed ahead lightly, rocked by the swell, its entire steel hull shivering under the formidable thrust of its formidable engines.

While everyone was settling in and most of the cabins were filled with frantic activity, in the sumptuous Apartment No. 1, which had been rented by the anonymous traveler people had talked about so much, the most absolute calm and silence continued.

After having to postpone its departure for two hours, in order to wait for this passenger who had paid 30,000 francs for the apartment, the Gigantic had left Le Havre, without anyone receiving any news at all about the rich traveler.

The apartment was free and empty and would be used by no one for the entire crossing. But that didn’t matter! The company had been paid in advance and had behaved correctly with respect to the luxury client, by postponing the departure of the ship by more than two hours, contrary to the rules and regulations.

The apartment seemed empty but it was, in fact occupied.

One of the rooms, at least, contained a passenger, perhaps two. In fact, there was a large wooden crate in the parlor, standing in the middle of the room, and that crate contained Juve.

The policeman, who had made holes in the wooden walls, glanced around the room, making sure that Pere Antoine had installed him where he wanted to be. He was waiting for an opportune time to climb out of his hiding place. Juve, who did not place much importance on premonitions, when they were not supported by precise facts, was nevertheless convinced that Fantomas was on board and was most certainly traveling on the Gigantic.

There was no doubt that Fantomas had reserved, or had had someone reserve, the luxurious apartment. Although the policeman had obtained no clues about the bandit, he did have very precise information about the content of each of the suitcases that the mysterious traveler had had carried onto the Gigantic.

One of the crates, which had been stowed in the hold and been inventoried by Juve’s men, was in fact, filled with gold and, based on the details his subordinate had provided, the policeman had recognized that gold as the gold the unfortunate Bedjapur had kept in his cellars which, it was discovered after his death, had been almost completely emptied by Fantomas and his gang.

That clue was enough to convince Juve that Fantomas was setting out for America and Juve had not been surprised that he had not seen the bandit, since he told himself, “Fantomas knows that he is being supervised, spied on, that all of the borders, all the trains, all exits are being rigorously guarded and, logically, that is why he decided to set off on board the Gigantic since the surveillance during the boarding process is not very rigorous.”

Juve congratulated himself for his strategy, which had enabled him to get into this apparently empty luxurious apartment where Fantomas would come sooner or later, where he would surely come.

Juve was still thinking, motionless in his crate, determined to climb out only when night had fallen, when, at one point, a small sound caught his attention.

“Oh!” thought the policeman, making sure that he had his loaded revolver close at hand, “Are we, are my adversary and I, already on the point of meeting?”

Juve was not particularly satisfied with that idea since, in fact, he was locked up in his crate and knew that it would take him a certain amount of time to remove the lid. And, if Fantomas arrived too soon, Juve would be locked up while Fantomas would be free. They would not meet as equals and the bandit would have the upper hand over the policeman.

Juve scolded himself.

“What’s done is done! I’m such an imbecile... I should have thought about this...I should have arranged things so that I could leap out of my crate at a moment’s notice.”

Yet, Juve reassured himself.

Listening, he heard nothing more, except, from time to time, strange cracking sounds, the creaking of wood, but he was unable to determine the source.

“How stupid I am!” he suddenly thought. “This ship is new, the wood trim is working, cracking, creaking, nothing could be more natural!”

At the same time, the policeman reassured himself.

“These normal noises will be of use to me and will mask the sounds made by my pliers and my chisel when I open my crate. The sounds produced by Pere Antoine’s planks will mingle with those of the wood trim that decorates this apartment.”

Juve waited a little longer and, since the cracking sounds continued, he did not hesitate to add those of his crate to the series that was being produced.

In 20 minutes, Juve had freed the lid of his crate and was simply waiting for an opportune time to climb out of his crate.

Night had fallen, the apartment was completely dark, and Juve decided to make his move.

“Let's go!” he said. “The time has come...”

But, he immediately stopped thinking, stopped moving. Only his heart was beating, pounding rapidly, since Juve had just heard a new noise, an unexpected noise, but one that was easy to recognize. The sharp clack of a gun being loaded!

“Oh!” though Juve. “This changes everything and complicates the situation a bit! Until now, I willingly believed that the sounds came from the wood trim that was creaking, but I had no idea that new furniture or cupboards were capable of making the sound of a browning that someone is preparing to use!”

Juve felt filled with courage and audacity.

“Well, if Fantomas wants a duel, then he will get one!”

Then the policeman said to himself, “I’ll let him know that I’m armed too!”

Without making any attempt to hide the sound, Juve armed his revolver as well. Then he listened.

His mysterious companion had noticed, since a profound silence washed over the room for a few seconds.

“Get up!” thought Juve.

And he got up.

At that moment, the ship was shaken by the sea and the policeman realized that the Gigantic was tilting to an unfortunate degree, making it hard for him to maintain his balance.

“Well, that is not going to make matters any easier,” he said to himself. “It would be nice to have some light...”

While remaining motionless for the moment, at the bottom of his crate, Juve tried to remember how the room was arranged. His knee brushed against a small sofa and he recalled that he was positioned not far from the wall that led into the corridor.

“So,” thought Juve, “By moving along this sofa and then walking straight ahead, I will reach the door that opens onto the antechamber. In all likelihood, the light switch for the parlor should be located on the wall to the left of the door. It might be risky, but it will be better, despite everything, to turn on the lights.”

And Juve bravely decided to implement his plan and tiptoed in the presumed direction of the light switch.

Suddenly he stopped and held his breath.

For a few moments, his legs had been brushing against furniture. But now, his shoulder had just struck something. Juve was unable to recall if there was a piece of furniture tall enough to reach his shoulder! Had he just bumped into someone else who was also walking about in the dark?

Despite his bravery, Juve felt emotion wash over him.

“I’m at the mercy of chance,” he thought. “It’s highly likely that, in a second, my adversary and I will be in each other’s arms, trying to perforate the other’s chest or skull with a revolver shot! The first one hit will die, unless we are both hit and we fall together, which is also quite possible... Damn! There’s nothing appealing about that hypothesis... I would really like to have some light!”

Juve stumbled about, as the ship continued to tilt and finally ran into the wall he was heading for.

He ran his hand along the wall, looking for the light switch. Just as he found it, but before he was able to turn it on, his hand brushed against another hand!

Juve did not withdraw his hand. Quite the contrary, his hand tensed over the hand he had encountered and that hand closed like a vise. Two men, holding hands, each trying to master the other, so that neither could say, “I’m holding”, “I’m being held”.

Who was the man that Juve felt standing so close to him?

Afraid to move, the policeman waited.

Juve experienced a few seconds that seemed as long as centuries to him. Suddenly, he made a decision. At all costs, he had to tear away from the grasp that held him. He pulled with all his might, but his adversary had had the very same idea and was also trying to free his fingers...

Juve abruptly let go and fell back, collapsing on the floor. At the same time, he heard another body fall, that of his adversary.

“This time,” thought Juve. “I have to take advantage of the situation. I have to act quickly...”

He wanted light and leapt for the switch. But he was jostled once again. The other man also wanted light, no doubt. The other man was going to turn the switch as well!

Which of the two men managed to turn the lights on? No one would ever know!

But, barely had the lights turned on, barely had the parlor been lit up with a pale, flashing light, then two cries rang out.

The two adversaries had seen one another. They stood there, dumbfounded, looking at each other. Then they cried out together.

“Juve!”

“Fandor!”



CHAPTER XXIII - Master Stroke



A large ship is like a city. It has its posh neighborhoods, as well as working class and poor ones.

So, the upper decks were filled with a rich and elegant crowd, wearing sumptuous outfits, gleaming jewels and in the lounges piles of gold appeared and disappeared on the green felt of the gaming tables, and people in the places reserved for the luxury, first and even second class, people spent without counting and in exchange received everything modern luxury and comfort could provide. But, the depths of the great ship, the dark holds, the dormitories reserved for immigrants swarmed with misery and poverty in striking contrast to the other spectacle.

And, as it has always been in certain cities, the neighborhood of the rich was off limits to the poor and those who could have helped the unfortunate never set foot in the neighborhood of the poor and this was the case of the Gigantic where the people on the upper decks had no idea what was going on beneath their feet.

The 5,000 human beings contained in the single, unique steel hull, were parked, catalogued in veritable superimposed drawers and they were destined to travel together across the ocean without ever being seen.

There was a large variety of passengers in the immigrants’ dormitory. Representatives of the most diverse nations seemed to have made a point to get together in these dark, stinking holds, where it was difficult for the air, already polluted by the upper decks, to reach.

The passengers, however, grew accustomed to the crossing. Although a few of the women had been sick when the ship set out, they eventually returned to good health and willingly made the most of the time they were allowed, two or three hours, to stroll on the deck to enjoy the salty ocean air.

Among the immigrants, in the women’s sector, there was a young girl, dressed modestly who, although she initially went unnoticed, was later noticed and appreciated for her distinguished air, her energetic look and her determined appearance.

She seemed to have lost her way in the midst of these immigrants and looked out of place, called by her appearance and attire to be somewhere else.

She was charitable, cordial with everyone around her, but, despite everything, not very sociable, seeming to be watching what was going on around her all the time.

One evening, instead of going to bed, as the other women in the dormitory were doing, this mysterious individual had left the vast room, which was plunged into darkness, and walking down poorly-lit corridors, had headed to the baggage room. She found an open door and walked into the black, gaping hold, where mountains of packages were piled.

The sea was rather wild and was shaking the boat.

Yet, there was no danger in walking about in the narrow corridors. And this woman was not walking randomly.

Obviously, she had a purpose and headed into the depths of the ship with the skill and ability of someone who was a member of the staff.

She exited from the other end of the baggage room, walking past a guard drowsing in a small cabin without making a sound and made her way into the area of the transatlantic ship that was reserved for the baggage and boiler room staff.

The zone was filled with the most unlikely and terrifying chaos.

Visitors would have thought they were in a coal mine and feared that the veritable mountains of that fuel would collapse, rolling down, in one fell swoop if they, like the baggage, had not been firmly stowed.

At the end of the coal hold there was a dormitory for the workers. A team of workers were sleeping in hammocks, snoring noisily. Some of the beds were empty. Yet, clothing, blue pants, a jacket were methodically piled at the foot of each bunk. This was the spare clothing that the firemen currently working next to the boilers would put on when they were soon relieved from their workstations.

What an extraordinary thing! This woman slipped soundlessly in the midst of all these sleeping men who were waiting their turn to go to work. She took off her dress in the dark and slipped into a man’s pair of pants and jacket!

She hid her hair, with its golden highlights, under a gray cap which she pulled down low over her ears, then walked into the coal hold and purposely dirtied her hands and face. Anyone who would have seen her would have found it impossible to recognize her as a representative, and even a very fair one at that, of the female gender.

This transformation had barely been completed when a commotion occurred among the sleeping firemen.

A whistle had sounded, a quartermaster had come to give the signal, it was the turn of the starboard firemen to replace their colleagues at the boilers.

The men walked slowly along a long, dark corridor, where dirty water covered the floor, until they reached the boiler room.

That room was filled with the formidable heat of the engines and the intense rods pivoting on their axes.

One by one, the men walked on, heading to replace their colleagues. There were about six in all. And what an extraordinary thing, in the place of one of those they were to replace, they saw an employee they didn’t recognize at all.

The man at the head of the line, who had walked on in order to take his usual place, was suddenly struck by the man who had replaced him, with an immense blow to the head. He fell down dead...

This unexpected murder was performed so abruptly, with such speed, that the unfortunate victim had not even cried out and the man behind him did not even realize what had happened. The second worker entered the hold and was in turn struck down!

Then, those that followed were starting to notice that something abnormal was going on. They moved back, then exclamations rang out. They saw the two men lying in pools of blood.

The quartermaster ran over.

“Hey!” he shouted. “What’s happening?”

At that moment, a detonation rang out. The officer had just been shot in the chest. The sound of the detonation was lost in the rumble of the machines, but panic spread immediately following this incident.

After hesitating, the four men who remained prepared to retreat. They saw that they were surrounded, that individuals with forbidding faces, with masked faces, were threatening them with knives, daggers and revolvers!

They heard shots, terrible death rattles, then silence fell. Five minutes later, the six replacements and their quartermaster, were lying motionless, swimming in their blood.

Someone had planned this butcherous attack. Someone robust and agile, whose completely black silhouette came and went like a shadow, as light as a ghost.

He had conducted the operation, the multiple murders, with supreme skill.

The man had just murmured a few words and the murderers under his command had quickly picked up the inert bodies then, as if they were used to doing this, they dumped then in the red furnaces where the incandescent coal snored. The odor of burning coal mingled with the scent of roasting flesh. Then, after ten minutes, there was no trace left of the bodies’

Yet someone, a frightened witness, had watched this frightful carnage.

It was the young woman who, a few minutes earlier, had disguised herself as a laborer, who had sought to mingle with the team of men heading for the boiler room.

She had miraculously escaped death. If she had walked into the middle of the group of victims, she would have joined them in their fate, but fortunately, no doubt by chance, she had remained a few yards behind, which spared her life.

Pale, overwhelmed with emotion, fear, the young woman could not tear her eyes from the man with the shadowy silhouette who seemed to have directed the frightening butchery.

Suddenly, her lips moved, weakly stammering a name: “Fantomas!”

She thought she would faint.

“Fantomas!” she murmured again. “I thought so... I was sure, Fantomas is taking over the ship. Fantomas brought who knows how many men here and is gradually replacing the real firemen and engineers with them!”

Then, frightened, the young woman turned back, returned to the dormitory and quickly put her women’s clothing on.

But her emotions were so strong, that, barely had she changed her clothes than she swooned, half dead from her emotions, and fell on a pile of clothes.

The ship, however, continued its rapid race across the ocean. Evening fell. The passengers from the first-class and luxury cabins, who had been separated during the day, started to speak with one another. Helped by the music, faces started to smile, conversations started up here and there, and, at the end of the meal, a cordial intimacy reigned among the guests, as they headed into the lounge and the smoking room.

Two charming American women wearing ball gowns suggested organizing a small party. The orchestra, accommodating them, set up in the lounge and performed fashionable tunes.

No one knew what had happened a few hours earlier in the depths of the ship.

They knew nothing of the drama that had taken place in the boiler room and a few officers, wearing dress attire, who were not on duty, had come to mingle with the passengers, no doubt unaware of the butchery for which there was a sole witness, a young woman who had surreptitiously left the immigrants’ quarters to go and see what was going on in the holds.

The ball was in full swing when, in the corridors, next to the cabins, someone was walking.

It was a young, blond woman, simply dressed. She seemed to hesitate, not knowing exactly where she was to go.

How did she get there?

This individual was none other than the woman who, a short while earlier, had witnessed the massacre. She had gradually made her way up hidden stairways up to the third deck, then the second. Then the first. She was quite pale and looked haggard.

Most certainly, she had not recovered from the emotions she had experienced.

Suddenly, a sort of guard, dressed in a uniform with braid, asked, “What are you doing here, Miss?”

The young women stammered, not knowing what to say.

“Oh!” said the man. “You look like you’re not feeling well... No doubt a touch of seasickness... Is this your first trip?”

“It is,” stammered the young woman. “It is my first trip!”

The man, who no doubt misunderstood, took a flask of smelling salts from his pocket and had her breathe in until she wanted to give it back to him.

He declared, “No, no, keep it... You may need it again!”

Then he added, “You are no doubt one of the new maids hired by the company for the crossing?”

Those words seemed to give the young woman an idea, and she bravely replied, “In fact, Sir, I’m one of the new chambermaids and I must admit that I lost my way in this large ship and I don’t know where to go.”

The man shrugged, saying “Good grief. It’s always the same thing. They hire more employees than they need, they don’t tell them what to do, they take on anyone, then it’s up to us, the supervisors, to deal with things afterwards... So, you don’t know if you’re in first, second or third class?”

“Good grief, no, sir.”

“Well, my girl, it’s easy enough to find out. I’m specifically short of people for the luxury class. I found you, I’ll keep you! Only, you must do me the pleasure of putting on an apron and a little lace hat. That’s the uniform here. It’s obligatory.”

The young woman submitted willingly.

“Fine, Sir,” she declared. “But where will I find such things?”

“In the linen room. Come with me!”

A few seconds later, having donned the small, white regulatory cap and the apron, the mysterious woman, still dizzy from her adventure, was walking beside the supervisor, along a lengthy corridor.

The supervisor gave her his recommendations with a protective air.

“Your role will be very easy and if you perform your duties suitably, I will keep you for the luxury cabins for all other crossings. I warn you though, that the work is hard. The clients are demanding but they pay well. For example, you have to wait for the clients, sometimes late into the night. Some continue to dance until three and four o’clock in the morning.”

“I’ll do my best!" replied the young woman.

The pair had arrived on the upper deck, close to Apartment No. 1.

“This apartment,” said the man to the young woman, whom he took to be a chambermaid.

“This room is part of your area. But you won’t have to anything during this crossing because the client is not there.”

“I’ll tell you what happened. Listen well and hold your tongue. There’s no need to gossip about this matter...”

The supervisor told her that an unknown individual had reserved this apartment, paid 30,000 francs in advance, but that he had never settled in. He had had crates carried on board but, the situation was most curious, most extraordinary and most surprising, since two hours earlier noises had been heard in that apartment. They had entered and they had found two men, armed with revolvers, who had immediately tried to hide when the staff entered.

The staff had rushed at them, arrested them, and questioned them, although the two individuals staunchly refused to provide any explanation.

As the supervisor spoke, the young woman opened her eyes wide, seeming to take a great deal of interest in his tale.

“What did the men look like?"

“Oh, they didn’t look wicked!" replied the supervisor, who most certainly misunderstood the reason for the question.

“One of them was 40 or 45 years old. The other was a young blond man with a small elegant mustache. Distinguished. But, you know, you can't trust appearances. Nowadays, bandits often look like people from the upper class!”

“And what did they do with these men?” the young woman asked.

The supervisor, who definitely found the so-called chambermaid quite charming, smiled at her in a friendly manner.

“Well, you’re afraid...” he said. “But there’s no danger! We put them in a small unoccupied room.”

He pointed at a door.

“That one, over there, Cabin No. 14. They’ve been locked up there for an hour. The Captain will come down to question them, along with the purser. For the time being, we’ll just leave them alone. It’s none of our business’”

And the supervisor proceeded to give some more instructions to the woman he considered a chambermaid.

“All you have to do is wait in the linen room until someone rings for you. There’s a panel of lights that indicate the cabin to which you are expected to go. This evening, you will be on duty until two in the morning. After that you will go to bed. Do you know where your dormitory is?”

“Of course!” said the young woman, who had no idea where the chambermaids slept, but she couldn’t give the impression that she knew nothing at all, to avoid rousing suspicions.

When the young woman was alone in the linen room, she collapsed on a stool and held her head in her hands.

“Good grief! Good grief!” she stammered. “What will I do? What will become of me? It’s terrible. How can I prevent frightening tragedies from happening here? How can I reach them, since I’m sure it is them, I’m sure they’re the ones that have just been caught and they didn’t want to identify themselves, because they certainly suspect something.”

The young woman had reached that point in her thinking when a bell rang.

Apartment No. 42 was calling her. She hurried off and met an American couple, a pretty young woman accompanied by her husband, a respectable looking man wearing an elegant suit.

The American woman gave her instructions for the following morning in a nonchalant and scornful manner. She wanted to be wakened at nine o’clock, she would take a bath scented with Cologne water; her husband wanted a whiskey soda and sliced ham when he woke.

Once the orders were given, the young woman withdrew.

But, as she stepped into the corridor she stopped, dumbfounded. Two valets in livery and a chambermaid had just walked past her.

The sight of these servants stirred a deep emotion within her. She stopped to let them walk past, then dragged her heels as she walked back to the linen room, where she fell onto the stool.

“Good grief! Good grief!” It’s terrible!” she murmured. “I know those people. They’re bandits, thieves... They belong to Fantomas’ band!”

“Fantomas! Fantomas!” she murmured again. “That’s it! So, he is on this ship. I realized that when I saw him and his accomplices take control of the machines. Then I found members of his gang among the second-class staff as I was walking through just now. And, people dedicated to him are mingling with the luxury cabin servants! But how can I warn them, how can I warn the others who, are no doubt hunting him? Oh! I absolutely must intervene and let them know. Cabin No. 14!" she murmured again. “That’s where they are!”

At the end of the fancy ball, the corridor for the luxury cabins was filled with people. A large number of people were returning to their cabins, coming and going, joyous conversations rang out. Then after half an hour, silence fell again and all that could be heard was the purring of the engines as they continued their monotonous song without interruption.

The electric lights in the corridor had been turned off, replaced by the pale, wan light of the lanterns. The young woman walked along the cabins, holding the handrail, until she reached

Cabin No. 14. She tried to open the door from outside, but could not. Then, with a trembling finger, she knocked discreetly at the panels and listened closely.

Inside the cabin were the two men who had been arrested in Apartment No. 1: Juve and Fandor.

Two hours earlier, they had found themselves face to face, completely dumbfounded by their unexpected encounter. The policeman and the journalist provided their explanations quickly.

“What are you doing here?” Juve asked, frowning.

Bursting into laughter, Fandor replied, “Come on, Juve. Could I let you go off all on your own while I stayed peacefully in Paris or Fontainebleau? I understood full well that you were heading off to track down Fantomas once and for all. I arranged to get on board this ship. A brave carpenter made me a crate in which I hid myself...”

Juve smiled.

“Well done!” he said. “We both had the same idea... Just like me, you supposed that Fantomas was the mysterious stranger who had reserved the apartment in which we find ourselves.”

Fandor replied with a laugh, “You’re a genius Juve for figuring that out. But I’m also a genius since I had the very same idea. And now here we are together. We'll just have to track down the one who is missing.”

“Good grief!” Juve said. “Fantomas is certainly on board! He had his treasure brought on board the Gigantic. He never travels without it.”

But, at that moment, the policeman stopped talking. Transatlantic Company employees burst into the apartment and rushed over to the policeman and the journalist.

“What are you doing here?” they asked.

Juve was about to reply, to identify himself, to identify his colleague, when his face suddenly turned pale.

In the group of five or six servants and crew members who had just hurried into the room, he recognized two individuals that he knew had worked with Fantomas for a long time. He motioned to Fandor to remain silent.

From that moment on, the supervisor, who was actually a company employee, questioned the two mysterious passengers as forcefully as he might, but he obtained no responses.

“Well!” he declared. “I will take you both, arrest you and you will explain things to the Captain!”

And the supervisor told his subordinates, “Lock these two men up in Cabin No. 14!”

And Juve and Fandor had been in that cabin for two hours now.

Juve had explained to Fandor why he had required him to remain silent. He did not want word to get out about their presence. When the captain arrived, they would explain things to him.

“This matter is serious!" said Juve. “I imagine that, if Fantomas has managed to sneak some of his accomplices into the Gigantic's personnel, he must be planning something quite formidable. He must not suspect that we’re here. Let’s try to keep that fact from him until the last moment!”

Juve continued, “It’s all the same Fandor. There was no point in you coming here! And when I think of poor Helene, whom you left behind... That moves me... Does she even know that you’ve left?”

And Fandor gravely replied, “I told Helene that

I had a duty not to abandon you... She agreed. She’s waiting for me in Paris.”

At the moment, someone knocked discreetly at the cabin door. Juve and Fandor looked at one another.

“Come in!” they said.

But the door was locked from the outside and, while Juve and Fandor could not open it from the inside, it was obvious that the person on the other side of the door could not let them out either.

Suddenly, Juve and Fandor shivered. They heard a voice calling from the other side of the door, “Juve! Fandor! Are you there?”

Fandor leapt.

“Helene! It’s Helene,” he cried out.

The sound of his voice crossed through the panel and he heard the answer.

“Yes, it’s me!”

“My God!” said Juve. “How did you get here?"

Helene’s voice replied, “How could I abandon Fandor who, in turn, was unable to abandon you?”

“Oh, what a brave little girl,” shouted the policeman as the journalist’s eyes filled with tears.

And both men checked their emotions.

Then, in a feverish voice, the young woman said, “Juve, Fandor, things are serious. Fantomas is on board. I saw him. Fantomas has brought a formidable band of accomplices with him. They are terrible people, capable of anything. With my very own eyes, I saw them assassinate seven unfortunate firemen. I imagine that Fantomas is in charge of the boiler room now. He has accomplices among the ship’s servants. I recognized a few...”

“Good grief!” shouted Juve. “We know that!”

Helene replied, “We have to get you out of there right now!”

“Damnation!” grumbled Fandor. “To think that we’re locked up in this cabin and Helene is alone, defenseless, on the other side of the door. If Fantomas were to walk by, he could kidnap her, kill her, and we would be unable to stop him.”

“Shut up! Shut up!” scolded Juve, who had suddenly had an idea.

“Give me your knife,” he said.

Fandor obeyed. Juve opened it quickly, with uncommon vigor, and he tried to break the lock, applying pressure to the door jamb.

“Daring Juve” shouted Helene, who had quickly realized what the policeman was trying to do.

Juve grew worried and said, “As long as I don’t make too much noise!"

But the young girl encouraged him, saying, “No, no, they can’t hear anything and there’s no one in the corridor... Be quick, Juve. I absolutely must join you, we must see one another, speak to one another, join forces and sound the warning as quickly as possible...”

“Yes, that’s it!” the policeman suddenly shouted.

At that moment, the door gave way. Helene fell into Fandor’s arms while Juve warmly clasped the young woman’s trembling hands.

“Finally!” they all shouted. “We’re back together!”

Then they looked at one another, with worried expressions on their faces.

Juve said, “We must not waste any time... Time is of the essence!”



CHAPTER XXIV  - Noname



It was the next day, about ten o’clock in the evening. Lieutenant Blancart, the captain of the Gigantic, was leaving his cabin to go to the bridge.

He wanted to be at the helm of the ship himself that evening. Before leaving his apartment, he made a recommendation to Mr. Chatier, the first officer, frowning, “Above all, don’t say a word about this matter... Don’t mention it to anyone and tell the men who were involved to keep silent.”

Mr. Chatier saluted the captain, saying, “You can count on me, Captain!”

Captain Blancart continued, “That should not

prevent you from continuing your searches. You have a police department on board. See to it that, as of tomorrow, we have our hands on those two guys.”

The police chief, “I’ll do my best, captain.”

Then the two men went their separate ways. Captain Blancart climbed up to the bridge on his way to replace his second officer who had been directing the operations of the Gigantic since six o’clock that evening.

No one had noticed that, during the day which was drawing to an end, a certain emotion, a great concern, had swept over the senior personnel on board. That morning, the captain had been informed that two suspicious men had been discovered in the famous Apartment No. 1, which was still empty, and that when they had been arrested by the crew members and a supervisor, they had not wanted to provide any explanation concerning their presence in the parlor of that apartment and that, as a result, they had been locked up in another cabin.

Yet, when the first officer had arrived, along with his secretary, to question these individuals, they found the cabin empty and the door skillfully broken.

The prisoners had escaped and the personnel had spent the entire day searching for them throughout the ship.

Yet, their searches had been in vain and when evening fell Mr. Chatier, the first officer, had gone to inform the captain about their lack of success.

During the afternoon, Lieutenant Blancart had been busy handling many matters. The section managers, the non-commissioned officers, and even a few lieutenants had presented most singular reports to him. There was less discipline than usual among the firemen and the engineers. The butlers had come to complain that their waiters were incapable of obeying. A few passengers had also complained that money was missing from their cabins, that jewelry had disappeared...

Efforts had been made to calm everyone and arrangements had been made to ensure the silence of the complainants, but the captain, who knew about everything that had been happening, was very emotional, very troubled, since he realized that unfortunate and abnormal things were going on. He presumed that an organized gang of wrong-doers was on board.

Nevertheless, the officer was far from imagining the truth and suspecting that a large number of crimes had already been committed, that the unfortunate firemen had been burned in the boilers and that sinister bandits were using threats and terror to make certain honest people, people who had managed to preserve their lives and remain at their workstations, obey.

Among the servants, the situation was the same. The usual company servants had been joined by numerous newcomers who appeared suddenly during the course of the crossing, as if they had popped up from the mysterious depths of the large floating city.

Yet, anyone who wanted to make an exact account of all this would have had to have nothing else to do and the captain of the transatlantic ship was much too busy with the technical operations of the ship to be able to pay the appropriate amount of attention to the events that were reported to him!

He had been particularly struck by the strange adventure the officer had just reported to him.

Undoubtedly, Apartment No. 1, the luxury apartment that cost 30,000 francs, was destined to provoke the most unusual comments and the unknown passenger that had reserved it and paid for it in advance seemed most mysterious!

Who were the men who had been arrested and then later escaped?

Where could they be found?

Obviously, they were hiding.

After recommending that his first officer remain silent about these incidents, the captain grew hopeful again, telling himself that if they did not find the suspicious men during the crossing, they would certainly be arrested when the ship arrived in New York.

The captain was a professional seaman who loved the sea for itself and, although he performed his bureaucratic duties out of necessity, he was most happy when it came time for him to climb up to the bridge and take charge of his beautiful ship.

He was most familiar with the Atlantic Ocean and it held no secrets for him. He had guided the most beautiful ships of the company, which he had served for fifteen years, and he was overjoyed to be in charge of the he Gigantic, which was to be the crowning moment of his career.

Lieutenant Blancart had climbed up to the bridge and, wrapped in his large great-coat, with the hood pulled down over his eyes, since it was very cold, he observed the horizon. The night was dark, but the distant rays of the moon occasionally pierced through the clouds, casting their pale light on the waves.

With the eyes of a seaman, Blancart observed the ocean.

He examined the electric equipment in front of him, which allowed him to transmit orders to guide the ship as he saw fit, simply by pushing a few buttons.

He observed a speedometer and was surprised at the speed at which they were traveling.

“Oh!” murmured the officer, “It seems that the machines are being pushed considerably! The two hours we lost at our departure were made up a long time ago. There is no point in pushing like this?

He was about to transmit an order to slow, but before he did so, he examined the horizon carefully.

White lines appeared, then disappeared in the distance. The officer wondered if they were simply intermittent reflections of the rays of the moon on the surface of the water, which was excessively calm. Then, suddenly, he shuddered.

“No,” he said. “It’s not the moon that is turning the ocean silver, it’s ice.”

And he immediately used the telephone to transmit the order to slow the engines.

Blancart was familiar with the region and knew that, at this time of the year, it was highly likely that they would encounter icebergs floating down from the Arctic Ocean to get lost in the Atlantic.

Like all sailors who have crossed the Atlantic, he dreaded encountering these large, threatening mountains of ice that loomed over the waves and hid their treacherous size under the water.

It was impossible for a ship to make its way through these veritable fields of floating ice and so he decided to give the order to slow. A few moments passed.

The captain looked at the speedometer and cried out in surprise, “But they’re not slowing! Did they not understand my order?"

He gave the order again, more forcefully this time.

Then he waited.

The captain’s bridge was rigorously closed on all sides. The officer was standing in a glass compartment from which he could see all around him, while remaining protected from the weather. Since he liked the fresh air a great deal and enjoyed feeling the sea breeze on his face, he had opened one of the panels and when the wind struck his face he realized that the temperature had been dropping for some time.

“There’s no doubt about it," he thought. “We’re approaching the region of floating ice fields!”

Suddenly, as he looked at the speedometer yet again, he swore.

“In the name of God, this is extraordinary. What a lack of discipline. I’ll have to give the order a third time if I’m to be obeyed!”

Furious, he picked up the telephone and screamed, “I’ve already ordered you to turn down the fires, to cut our speed by one-third!”

Suddenly, the captain turned around.

Someone had just touched him on the shoulder, someone who had entered the compartment, without Blancart noticing. He could not make out the newcomer’s features. While everything else on the ship was brightly lit, in order for the captain to be able to see at night, his bridge was plunged into the deepest darkness. The devices he had to consult were lit by small lamps that only shone on the dials.

The newcomer addressed Captain Blancart.

“There’s no point,” the main said gently, “There’s no point for you to worry about giving orders. The people manning the engines will not obey you!’

“Really,” said Blancart. “I’d like to know why.”

“Because,” continued the mysterious stranger, “Because I’m the one in charge now and they obey me!”

The captain felt anger wash over him.

“Who are you?” he shouted. “What are you doing here? Who gave you the right to come up here? You know that this place is off limits to the public!”

“Not to me,” the man interrupted. “I’m the Master!”

“This man is crazy,” thought Blancart, who was about to press on the alarm button to call for help. But his movement was noticed and the mysterious stranger shrugged.

“No point sounding the alarm,” he said. “The device no longer works.”

Blancart pressed on the button anyway.

Then, furious, he shouted at the man standing in front of him, “Too bad whether help comes or not. I’m warning you that if you don’t get out of here in two seconds, I’ll throw you overboard!”

The captain’s anger did not move the man standing there.

“Just two words, Captain,” he said. “Are you prepared to listen to me?”

Blancart hesitated visibly, wanting to get rid of this visitor.

He could not make out the other man’s features in the dark, but he did see his silhouette, the silhouette of a powerful man, robustly built, a large black cape swirling about him. Like him, like Blancart, the man’s hood was pulled down over his face.

Moreover, the officer realized that, far from slowing, the transatlantic ship was going faster and faster. It seemed that, since he had given the order to slow the engines had accelerated. The speedometer indicated a knot more than previously.

“They’re crazy!" grumbled Blancart,

For the fourth time, he was about to call, but the other man stopped him.

“You promised to give me your attention for two seconds. I will no longer allow you to keep me waiting. Captain, if you value your life, obey me without discussion. Behind me, I have six dedicated men who will take you and will drag you down into the holds. I want to take charge of the ship.”

“And I want to get rid of you,” grumbled the captain.

Mad with rage, he rushed at the mysterious stranger, who stopped him short, pointing a gun at his chest.

“Stop there!’ he ordered. “One last time, do you refuse to obey me and accompany my men?”

“Yes, I refuse,” said the captain, making an effort to hide and avoid the threat of the revolver.

But the barrel of the weapon followed him, implacably.

“Too bad!” shouted Blancart, “I’ll kill him or he will kill me, but this has to come to an end!”

And he was about to reach his hand into his pocket and bring out his own revolver. But his movement had been anticipated.

“Don’t make a move,” shouted the man. “Don’t move or I’ll shoot you down immediately!”

Then he insisted, “One last time, Captain, surrender! You have no idea who you are dealing with.”

“Who I’m dealing with...” stammered the officer, confused.

But he stopped short again, interrupted by the man who said, “You’re dealing with Fantomas! Fantomas! The uncatchable Criminal Mastermind! You are dealing with the undisputed master, the man who gives orders when he wants and who desires to be the leader. Nothing will be able to resist me today, just as nothing has been able to resist me in the past. The future is mine. I go where I want and I crush all those who get in my way!”

“Fantomas,” stammered the captain.

The name of the sinister bandit, the name of horror and crime was not unknown to the captain. Far from it. Despite his courage, Captain Blancart shivered from head to toe at the thought that he was facing the most formidable bandit the planet had ever known.

“What do you want?” he said.

“For you to surrender to me,” said Fantomas.

“Never!”

“Then,” said the bandit. “This discussion has gone on too long!”

He pointed his gun at the captain yet again. Shivering, the captain searched through his pocket. He had to defend himself at any cost. He would shoot. But although his gesture had been quick, Fantomas had been even quicker.

“Die!” shouted the sinister Criminal Genius.

A shot rang out. The captain fell, struck by a bullet. Fantomas rushed over to the telephone.

“Victory!” he shouted into the device. “I’m in charge! And now, push the engines my friends. Full speed ahead!”

He had barely uttered this order when a slight tremor occurred, accompanied by a dull noise... It seemed that the ship, the entire formidable structure, had just been shaken, that its hull had shuddered.

“What is that?” asked Fantomas, surprised for a moment.

It seemed to him that the ship was moving off its course. The needle on the compass had just jumped, and the progress of the transatlantic ship had slowed somewhat. Yet, nothing abnormal seemed to happen and Fantomas, picked the telephone back up and repeated: “Stoke the fires! Full speed ahead!”

Someone groaned behind him. Fantomas turned his head and saw the captain, who was dying. His face had grown deathly pale and black blood was flowing from his chest, but his lips smiled ferociously. He laughed as he looked at Fantomas.

“Wretch! Wretch!” he stammered.

The vision of the dying man troubled the bandit. Had he perhaps pushed his audacity too far? Ever since he had taken over the controls of the formidable transatlantic ship, he had been wondering if he really were capable of operating it properly.

But that moment of doubt did not last.

Looking at the dying man, Fantomas declared, “You didn’t want to obey my orders and you are dying... Your death will serve as an example for those around you. Because that’s how I treat everyone. I am the Master, I do what I want and anyone who gets in my way, who tries to stop me, will be crushed!”

“Anyone...” repeated the dying officer. “Not always! There may be exceptions, Fantomas.... And you may meet your master!”

Fantomas sniggered.

Despite everything, this man, who was so indifferent to the agony of his victims, seemed to be upset by the dying officer’s words.

He bent down over the other man, wanting to know what he was thinking and, since the captain did not utter another word, Fantomas shrieked in triumph, “No one can thwart me, this ship is mine, I will take it where I please... It is the most powerful, the fastest ship in the world. I am made for it just as it is made for me, we will encounter no obstacles!”

A hoarse whistle escaped from the captain’s injured chest.

“Yes, you will,” he said.

“What are you saying?” asked Fantomas, who grew pale despite himself.

"There is an obstacle that will stop both you and the ship!”

The bandit had to bend low, place his ear close to the dying man’s lips, in order to hear him. His words already seemed to come from beyond the grave and impressed the Criminal Mastermind most singularly.

“An obstacle? What obstacle?” asked Fantomas.

The captain had grown paler and paler. His lips were turning blue, his eyes were glassy, and blood continued to flow from his chest. He tried to get up, but could not. He tried to speak but the words died on his lips. Finally, making a supreme efforts, as Fantomas waited for his final words, he clearly said, “You will encounter an obstacle and it will be stronger than you... That obstacle is already present. It’s the ice!”

The crowd of dancers, in the first-class lounge, rushed at the gypsy orchestra.

“No, no, no more waltzes!” they shouted. “A tango! We want a tango!”

The first violin, a very dark man with a bushy mustache, eyes shining like flames, gallantly bowed to the graceful American woman with her low-cut bodice, and provocative bosom, who had come to him to request a fashionable dance.

The gypsy sighed.

“The Duchess’ desire will be fulfilled. My orchestra can play marvelous tangos. But does Madam know someone who is worthy of dancing with her?”

The young American woman, who wore a superb diamond egret in her hair, smiled at the musician.

“Baldini,” she said (she knew his name since she had heard him perform all winter in the Parisian salons). “Baldini, you are exaggerating my abilities! I’m not such a good tango dancer as people say!”

Baldini insisted, “Excuse me, Madam Duchess, but in all of Parisian society, I know no one...”

He stopped talking. He had just stumbled and the same jolt had almost thrown the pretty American woman into his arms.

They looked at one another. The incandescent soul of the gypsy was most upset.

The dancers were surprised.

“What’s happening?” they asked.

They stopped chatting, a few men left the room and climbed up to the bridge, taking the wide, main staircase.

The dancers included the American woman’s husband, the Due of Vielmar, a young, penniless snob who had married the daughter of a large American industrialist to whom he had given his title in exchange for money.

When he reached the upper deck, the Due of Vielmar met Charles, the restaurant’s maitre d’.

“Well, man, what’s happening?”

The maitre d’ was running.

He replied, “Duke, one of my men has certainly dropped an entire stack of dinner plates from China, that we had taken out for the dinner this evening. I’ve just heard an incredible racket and I’m running over to see...”

“Charles,” interrupted the Duke. “Did you feel something, a jolt?”

“Ah!” said the restaurant employee. “Did the Duke hear it as well?”

The two men looked over the railing at the calm sea.

“Well,” they said. “It must be some swell or perhaps a wreck that has hit the ship!”

The mild emotion that seemed to have been caused by the incomprehensible jolt quickly faded.

The Gigantic continued on its way, steering through the dark of night, the delightful strains of a tango rose from the ball room. The gypsies had returned to their violins and Charles, who

listened carefully, heard no sound of dishes breaking.

The duke went back down to the ballroom as two English officers, who were smoking small clay pipes, were talking on the step of the upper deck, returning to their conversation which had been momentarily interrupted.

“My dear Wilding,” said one of them, pointing at the horizon. “Fve seen the ocean like this before. But it was not during a campaign in South America, it was as we were approaching a polar ice field...”

A seamstress, a French woman, Mme Menart, was walking along one of the second-class corridors with three young girls, whom she had brought with her from Paris, two models and a designer she was taking to her branch in New York. The four women were returning to their apartments after attending the amateur show that had been performed in the passengers’ lounge.

“Ah!” said Miss Germain, one of the two models. “That singer we heard just now was certainly most handsome! “Being a performer is such nice work... and there is so much entertainment on this ship!

Mme Menart nodded her head, saying, “My dear child. I have a sister who was a performer and she died in poverty... And as for the entertainment on this ship, I don’t know, but

I must admit, that I’ve been frightened.... Everything creaks all the time, we hear mysterious sounds...”

Then she added, “You didn’t feel the jolt just a while ago?”

“Yes,” replied Miss Germaine. “And I suppose it’s not important at all!”

They stepped to the side of the corridor, to let a herd of sailors in uniform run past very quickly.

“Good grief! Where are those men going?” asked Mme Menart.

And, since she did not feel reassured, the seamstress spoke to the quartermaster who was accompanying the sailors, saying, “Everything is fine, isn’t it?”

To her great surprise, the officer replied, “Oh, I think it’s nothing, but we have to keep an eye on things.”

The seamstress turned to the young girls and said, “Did you hear that? What does that mean?”

Miss Germain turned very pale.

“That seaman doesn’t look worried!”

The four women were still standing in the corridor when, suddenly, they saw some people they had never seen before appear from a staircase. They were covered with coal dust, soot and grease.

“Good grief!” said the brave woman. “Who are those devils?”

The devils did not respond to the unflattering remark, but one of them, as he was passing close to Miss Germain, whispered in a low voice as he looked at her, “Be careful, miss. Don't go to bed right away... There’s water in the holds. Chest high. Things are not fine!”

“What’s that?”

“Things are not fine... It might be a small matter, but be careful anyway.”

Those were the words that were first murmured in a low voice and then shouted out loud. Most certainly emotion was washing over the ship. The senior officers, the personnel supervisors, tried as they might to reassure people, to put on friendly smiles, but people quickly realized that they were making an effort and their expressions reveal serious concern.

Something was definitely going on, but what?

From inside the ship, three people appeared: Juve, Fandor and Helene. Since the morning, they had been hidden. In disguise, they had been coming and going everywhere they could go unnoticed, studying the employees. They had come to the conclusion that Fantomas had installed a considerable crowd of his accomplices on board. They had encountered these people among the crew, among the sailors, with the emigrants, people from the bandit’s most diverse gangs. They seemed to be waiting for a signal to rush at the honest people and make it impossible for them to defend themselves.

Juve, Fandor and Helene understood the Criminal Genius’ plan.

There was no doubt about it. He had sworn he would grab the Gigantic, planning to turn it into an impregnable fortress!

Juve and Fandor knew about the first murders committed by Fantomas and they feared there would be more.

They had kept themselves hidden all day because they initially wanted to understand exactly what was going on and then because they wanted to discover Fantomas. They had searched in vain. The terrible bandit remained invisible.

Finally, as evening fell, and once they knew exactly how many men Fantomas had, Juve, Fandor and Helene had decided to go and find the captain, to introduce themselves and to tell him everything.

They stepped out of the third door and stopped along the railing, surprised by the activity on board and still not recovered from the emotion of tragic foreboding they had experienced when, ten minutes earlier, they had felt the mysterious jolt.

“What’s happening?" they asked.

As Juve walked ahead, the seamstress, Mme Menart, approached him.

“Excuse me, sir," she said. “Do you know why the firemen have come up from the holds? One told me that there was water chest high in the holds. Is that true?”

“Good grief!” exclaimed Miss Germaine. “We’re sinking!”

She cried out in fear. People were starting to notice that the ship was tilting slightly to the left. Yet it was still steaming ahead.

Juve shook his head.

“It’s nothing! He said. Perhaps a gust of wind has caused us to tilt... Don’t worry ladies!”

He left the women quickly, dragging Fandor and Helene along with him. He clasped the young woman’s hand and leaned close to the journalist.

“Something serious is going on,” he murmured in the other man’s ear. “Look down there!”

Without the slightest amount of difficulty, Juve, Fandor and Helene reached the main, first-class deck. They ran into all kinds of people. In particular, they were jostled by the two Englishmen who, a few moments earlier, had been strolling on the deck. And one of the men shouted in a voice that was both fearful and ridiculous at the same time, speaking in heavily accented French, saying “We’re lost! The tennis court is under water!”

Juve shuddered when he heard those words.

He reached a sort of balcony that looked over the prow of the ship and pointed the starboard side out to Fandor.

“What?” said the journalist.

“Well, look!" said Juve. “Look... everything is plunged into darkness!”

He also had the impression that the engines were pulsing weakly, in a jerky manner. Then there was a tidal wave of humanity, surging ahead in a crazy race...

Officers, seamen appeared from everywhere.

“Attention! Be careful!” they shouted.

A second lieutenant intervened. He stood at the top of a staircase. Pale and furious, or so it seemed, when he saw the sailors, the firemen and the engineers appear like that, from inside the ship.

“What’s up with you?” he scolded. “Everyone go back to their stations! I’ll blow the brains out of the first man who does not obey!”

Despite his threat, no one obeyed. Of course, he had stopped the crowd of fleeing men, but a junior officer approached him and said out loud, “Lieutenant, there has been an accident, a serious accident, we hit something, an iceberg no doubt. The outer hull has been pierced and water is flowing in...”

The lieutenant chewed on his lip.

“Shut up!” he grumbled. “There’s no point in panicking the passengers!”

But the officer’s attempt to keep the approaching danger under cover were in vain. Orders were being given everywhere, transmitted by the other officers, shouting.

“To your cabins!”

“Tell the passengers to come up on deck!”

“Seamen, crew members, return to your stations! No one move!”

“Get to the rear of the ship!”

Then, suddenly, rope barriers were set up. A few passengers wanted to rush to the front of the ship.

“We can't get through, we can’t get through...” they said.

And since some of them insisted, panicked, wanting to rush where it as forbidden, the officers shrugged and said, “Go there at your own risk. We’re no longer responsible for anything...”

Anguished cries, worried murmurs spread

through the enormous floating city. People appeared from everywhere, people wearing evening dress, women in low-cut dresses, men in black suits rubbed shoulders with mechanics in blue uniforms, women dressed poorly who had come up from the depths of third class. It was total chaos...

Juve, Helene and Fandor had been pushed, by the flow of the crowd, to the entrance of the first-class ballroom where people were still dancing.

The vision of this joyous and elegant ball, of the women with their jewels, of the elegantly dressed men, dancing to the thrilling pace of the gypsy orchestras, stood out in stark contrast to the comings and goings on the deck.

But, suddenly, the charm of the ball was broken, because the ship had tilted so much that all of the dancers had slid to one corner of the room, slipping, tripping over one another.

Baldini the gypsy fell at the feet of the pretty duchess and, unable to hide his emotions, intoxicated by the music, by the atmosphere in the ballroom, he stammered, “You are so beautiful! You are so beautiful. If only you would love me!”

At the bar, two men were drinking enormous whiskey sodas.

Juve, Fandor and Helene ran past them and the journalist, who had no doubt as to the danger they all faced, burst out laughing. He had just overheard one of the drinkers say to his neighbor, “I must be drunk old man! I thought my drink was standing in front of me and here it is on the floor.” The glass had, in fact, fallen to the floor.

As they made their way back up to the deck, they encountered a furious crowd.

Three men were fighting, three men wearing white aprons tied at their waists, three men with pale faces, with terrified expressions.

“They're bandits, thieves!” people shouted. “They searched the cabins, they’re stealing things...”

Juve clenched his teeth nervously, frowning. “Oh!’ he said. “Things are going badly!”

The entire front section of the ship was now plunged into darkness and looked as if it were standing on end, slipping into the ocean. People had also realized that the ship was stopped.

A short distance from Juve, there was a sort of small cabin, on which the letters WT were written. It was the wireless telegraph office. The rattle of the telegraph equipment could be heard.

Someone rushed into that office. There was only one employee on duty. The man who had just entered was wrapped in a large black greatcoat and his face was hidden by a hood.

The telegraph operator saw him and thought he was Captain Blancart.

The man questioned the telegraph operator in a deep voice, “What messages have you sent out so far?”

“Captain," said the man. “I’m trying to contact the ships that may be located nearby. I’ve warned them that we are in distress, that the Gigantic had run into an ice field, that there is a hole in the hull that cannot be repaired... I’ve told them that we may be able to last an hour. I hope they can reach us by then!”

He stopped talking, then continued in a more joyful tone, saying “Captain, listen... Look at this! Someone has answered... I knew it. It’s the Maurania, on its way to Liverpool. They must be nearby, they’ve heard our calls..."

The telegraph operator continued to translate the rattles of his device.

“They’ve answered that they’re rushing toward us, that they are still 70 miles from us. We’ll have to wait for them to get here...”

The other man had not turned a hair. He listened attentively to the telegraph operator. Then the man the operator presumed was the captain, ordered, “We don’t need anyone. Tell the Maurania to continue on its way without worrying about us!”

“But, Captain,” shouted the employee, dumbfounded.

“Do as I say!” specified the man.

The telegraph operator turned pale.

He looked at the other man and saw his face.

“But, who are you? You’re not Captain Blancart...”

“That’s possible,” replied the man. “But I am the Master, I’m Fantomas. Obey my order!”

“Fantomas!” shrieked the employee. “Help! Help!”

He was unable to continue. With a blow of his dagger, Fantomas stabbed the man in the chest and raced off.

The telegraph operator stood up. The weapon was stuck in his throat. He felt terribly, fatally wounded. His first instinctive movement was to pull the knife out of the wound.

It was causing him intolerable pain, yet the man stiffened.

“If I pull out the dagger” he said. “If I pull out the dagger, my blood will pour out and I will die immediately... I cannot... I have to have time to warn people, to send out a telegram...”

The man dragged himself along the floor, pale, bleeding. He managed to pull himself up onto his chair, while his strength and blood flowed out of him, out of his wound, out of his lips, out of his nostrils, as his fingers were splashed with blood and a fog formed in front of his eyes, the fog of death... He made a supreme effort to communicate with the Maurania.

“Hurry! Hurry! We are lost!” he transmitted, as life seeped from his body.

He was almost a cadaver yet he called for help for the passengers of the Gigantic.

Just as the telegraph operator was dying, an uproar broke out on the deck.

An order had been shouted, sowing panic.

Someone had shouted: “Lower the lifeboats!”



CHAPTER XXV - Brothers!



As he was returning from an official banquet, the Minister of the Interior was stopped at the door to his personal apartment by his private secretary.

“Mr. Minister! Sir!" said the young man. “A frightful tragedy is playing out. Here are the telegrams...”

Mr. Paul Garet, Minister of the Interior walked into his office, reading the document his assistant had given him.

Gigantic. Telegram. At 10:42 the transatlantic ship, the Gigantic, heading for New York, struck a submerged ice berg in the ice field and its starboard hull was pierced. Impossible to staunch the incoming flow of water. The ship is in a nose dive and seems compromised. Rescue operations are being organized. The steamer, the Maurania has been contacted and the two ships are in communication.

“Good grief!” shouted the Minister of the Interior. “That’s dreadful! Is there any other news?”

The private secretary handed another telegram to the Minister.

The calls to the Maurania have been heard but that ship is approximately 80 miles away. Will the

Gigantic survive until it arrives? Calm sea, foggy, panic on board, courageously put down by the officers... Danger of sinking is increasing, the ship is tilting, the engines have been shut down.

Paul Garet grew very pale.

“These telegrams are terrible! The Gigantic was the company’s most superb ship! There are more than 4,000 people on board! Can we save it?”

“Unfortunately...” said the private secretary.

Sounds could be heard in the corridor; the Minister’s secretary ran out to see what was happening and encountered a clerk bringing a new telegram.

“Hand it over!” said the minister.

And this time, as he read, he turned completely white and had to sit down. He was terribly frightened.

The employee who sent this telegram has just been mortally wounded by a bandit who says that he is called Fantomas and wants to prevent the Maurania from coming to the rescue, I am sending the telegram anyway, but...

The telegram stopped there. The two men looked at one another.

“What does this mean? Do you understand this?” asked the Minister.

“Good grief!” stammered his private secretary.

“I don’t know what to think!”

The two men looked at one another for a few seconds.

Paul Garet said, “But we have to take action, we have to do something... We have to intervene, to respond to those unfortunate people...”

Then he stopped, realizing just how powerless he was, realizing that there was nothing to be done but wait, hopelessly.

The minister paced back and forth in his office like a deranged man.

“This is dreadful! Unheard of! Not only is an abominable drama playing out, which we must watch helplessly, the death of the Gigantic, but the horror of this catastrophe is made worse by the presence of Fantomas on board the ship... no, no, no, that can’t be... it’s too much!”

The telephone rang suddenly.

The Minister rushed over to the device.

“Hello! Hello! Is that you, Havard? Yes, it’s me. What? What did you say? An accident? Two accidents? A fort that has exploded near Paris... a bridge that has been blown up in the suburbs... You’re coming? Yes, I’ll wait for you!”

He hung up the telephone, stumbling like a drunken man.

“What is it, Mr. Minister? Has something happened?” asked the private secretary, grimacing with the maddest anguish.

“The, the...” stammered the minister. “The greatest cataclysms are taking place at this very moment and we don’t know what is going on... Oh! My God! This attack... Apparently, Havard has some terrible things to tell me about...”

The Minister consulted his watch feverishly.

“He should have left the Quai des Orfevres five minutes ago. He won’t be long since he’s taking his car.”

Someone knocked at the office door.

“Another telegram!” shouted the secretary.

The Minister read it.

The telegram had been sent from London. It announced that the docks were on fire, that the fire had been lit by the hand of a criminal, that an entire neighborhood in the city was about to disappear in flames...

The Minister had no words left to comment on the events. Finally, the Head of the Surete appeared. He was pale as well, and his clothes were untidy.

“Mr. Minister!” he shouted. “It’s the end of everything... I’ve just learned about new disasters.”

“I know,” said the Minister. “London, the Gigantic...”

“And Brussels!” shouted the head of the Surete. “The Gare du Nord has collapsed, two passenger trains have been crushed under the rubble.” The telephone rang again. The private secretary picked up, then announced, “It’s the Spanish embassy... It seems that three bombs have exploded in the Palais de l’Escurial. His Majesty is safe, but three ministers have been killed!”

Mr. Havard, Mr. Paul Garet and the private secretary looked at one another, dumbfounded.

What was going on? What was the cause of all these disasters, all these catastrophes, transmitted by telegrams with an un settling brutality, with such cynical thoroughness?

Why was all this happening? Yes, why?

Little by little, the Department had been wakened, clerks, torn from their slumber, came and went in the corridors. Noises could be heard in the yard behind Place Beauvau. Automobiles were rushing in. Journalists panicked by the telegrams their newspapers had received were coming to the Minister of the Interior to get information.

“Another telegram!" shouted the Minister’s private secretary.

“Read it!" said Paul Garet, who had collapsed onto a couch.

The secretary obeyed.

The Gigantic is sinking and no one will be saved, not even myself, but I want my death to be dedicated to one final act of vengeances! I have sent telegrams to all my accomplices in all of the capitals around the world, telling them to celebrate my death with some cataclysmic event. You will learn about horrors that have occurred in London, Madrid, Brussels and Paris. Farewell!

“The signature? The signature? What madman or monster could have sent such a telegram?"

In a quavering voice, the private secretary replied, “The telegram is signed.... Fantomas!”

In the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, under calm skies, on still gray waters, a poignant tragedy was playing out. A formidable ship, the Gigantic, tilting slightly to the left, was filling bit by bit with water, threatening to sink. Illusions were no longer possible. Everyone knew what was about to happen. The Gigantic was about to disappear in the ice field!

Yet, after the initial moment of panic, relative calm returned. People had been frightened when they heard voices cry out, “To the lifeboats!”

Everyone had wanted to rush, but the seamen, directed by the second lieutenant, stopped the crowd of passengers. The officer waved his gun.

“I order everyone to obey me absolutely.” He said. “The slightest sign of rebellion will be punished with death.”

Then, a troubling silence washed over the crowd, interrupted only a by a few frightened moans. The officer, very pale, gave orders.

“Women first! Only women!”

Then he turned to the seamen and ordered, “One man for each lifeboat to take the oars, then load the women, in order and silence. Twenty-five people for each lifeboat and not one more!”

The scene was both frightening and heartrending. This way and that, shoving and pushing, the women rushed towards the lifeboats, some wearing ballgowns, others half naked, roused from their beds. There were chambermaids, emigrants, great ladies, young girls, old ladies and cries of despair rang out in the crowd. Husbands, brothers, parents hugged one another as their wives, sisters and daughters were torn from them...

Some did not want to leave. The officers insisted once, and once the women made their decision they were pushed back with the herd of men, toward the middle of the ship...

The first lifeboat was lowered into the water and as it moved away from the ship people heard two cries, followed by the dull sound of two bodies falling into the water.

Two passengers, driven half mad by terror, had jumped into the ocean from a height of 80 feet!

However, on the deck, seamen were reassuring the passengers who were stamping their feet impatiently, some screaming, some weeping, some praying.

“Don’t be afraid!” said the men. “Nothing is lost!”

They pointed at a luminous reflection in the distance.

“A ship is approaching!" they shouted. “And it’s not certain that the Gigantic will sink!”

And these encouraging words changed the crowd’s attitude. They swept from one extreme to the other and now the most desperate ones were those who had allowed their wife, their sister, their mother to set out in the frail, overloaded lifeboats that looked like shadows in the distance, lost in the immense ocean.

All of the starboard lifeboats were in the water. They could be heard rowing away from the ship, accompanied by shouts, heartrending appeals, as they faded into the distance.

Shouts rang out from the top of the ship. The lifeboats had been lowered into the water, with such haste, in such a rush to escape that three of four could be seen moving away, half empty. Then the sinister sound of a body falling into the water was heard. People were pitching themselves into the ocean, hoping to escape the upcoming cataclysms.

As time passed, the darkness grew deeper on the ship. The electric lights were going out as the water rose. At times, sinister, frightful cracking sounds could be heard.

They were caused by the water which, as it flowed in, broke down walls, gaining ground. Water spewed from the hatches as people felt a large gust of cold air flow from the air shafts.

Yet, in the midst of this chaos and fear, the rousing, radiant music of the gypsies could be heard as they played a terrifying, rough tango quickly and madly!

The lights were still shining in the first-class ballroom, where frightful scenes were playing out.

Hugging couples were spinning desperately, drunk at the thought of imminent death, wanting to finish their lives in a swirl of pleasure. Lovers embraced, exchanging their final kisses of love. Baldini, his eyes wild, had broken the strings on his violin with the brutality of his bow. And, throwing his useless instrument away, he rushed over to the duchess, who was half mad with fear, and took her in his arms.

“I love you... I adore you...” he stammered.

At the bar, the two drinkers had filled their glasses to the top with whiskey.

“I assure you,” one of them said to the other. “I assure you that all this is a joke... The ship is not moving. We’re just drunk to the gills!”

And they continued to drink. One fell to the floor, dead drunk. While the other, overcome by alcoholic fury and dementia, grabbed a bottle by the neck and, using it like a club, started bludgeoning people all around him, hitting the tables, the counter, breaking glasses, shattering mirrors!

The pale barman was crawling on all fours, having filled his pockets with the cash from the bar. He searched the unconscious drunk man, taking his gold watch and his wallet. An officer running through the room noticed him.

“Wretch!” he screamed. “How can you think about stealing at such a time!”

And, since the barman made an insulting gesture in his direction, the office grabbed a chair and broke it over the other man’s head.

Suddenly, the lights went out. The only light in the room was the red glow of a fire burning 150 yards from there, at the rear of the ship, as the nose of the vessel sunk deeper and deeper in the heavy, black water...

It was getting more and more difficult to lower the lifeboats on the port side. A few women who had fainted were packed into the lifeboats, one of them, forgotten, had been thrown into a lifeboat like a package. A voice called out in a frightful scream. The unfortunate woman, had broken both legs when falling into the lifeboat!

Juve, Helene and Fandor had been separated, then reunited. A seaman wanted to the take the young woman away, but she clasped her arms about the journalists’ neck, sobbing.

“No, no, I don’t want to leave!” she screamed.

But Fandor pulled her arms away and passed her over to the sailors.

“Fandor! Fandor!” Helene shrieked in desperation. “I don’t want to leave... I don’t want to leave...”

But no one listened to her and she was thrown into a lifeboat.

The journalist, whose heart was pounding, bent over the railing to make sure that Helene was safe.

He saw her lying, unconscious, in the lifeboat a few yards below him.

Then, suddenly, Fandor felt himself lifted by an irresistible force, just as a voice murmured in his ear, “You’ve done your duty young man. You have to protect her. Leave with her and don’t regret anything.”

It was Juve who uttered those words!

Fandor did not have time to reply. He felt as if he were spinning in the void. Then he hit the bottom of the lifeboat. His head struck the edge, he felt a terrible pain, and lost consciousness next to Helene.

Juve wiped a tear from his eye and sighed with satisfaction.

He had completed the plan he had been considering for a few moments. He had torn Helene and Fandor from the grip of a frightful death.

Now, it was over! Juve crossed his arms over his chest, waiting for the fatal moment. But, just as he turned his head away, to avoid watching as the lifeboat carrying Helene and Fandor moved away, someone placed a hand on his shoulder.

“We have saved them,” said the newcomer.

Juve then recalled that someone had helped him throw Fandor into the lifeboat where Helene was lying. He looked at the man who had spoken to him, then he shuddered and clenched his fists.

“Fantomas!” he exclaimed.

It was, in fact, Fantomas who stood facing Juve. The two men were about to rush at one another. But a sudden shock, a shudder from the dying Gigantic threw both men to the deck!

They fell into a stairwell, rolling down the steps. But the two men got back to their feet and stood facing one another at the entrance to a small corridor lit only by the dim light of a small emergency lantern with a reddish, smoky flame.

Juve placed his hand on Fantomas’ shoulder.

“Finally!” he said.

He dug through his pocket, looking for his revolver but Fantomas, who was as quick as a thought, grabbed the weapon and took it from Juve.

“There’s no point killing me,” he said.

But the policeman, surprised by this unexpected attack, threw himself at the bandit, wrapping his hands around the other man’s throat.

“Wretch! Scoundrel!” he shrieked.

Fantomas stumbled for a minute, then stiffened and pulled himself free of Juve’s grasp.

“Mercy!” he simply said.

And that word was so unexpected and so extraordinary, coming from Fantomas’ mouth, that Juve was dumbfounded...

The bandit continued, “Juve, we only have a few minutes left to live. Death is waiting for us. It will wrap us in the same shroud. Killing me would be a pointless and cowardly crime on your part. Besides, I could kill you and I’m not!”

“Fantomas” shouted Juve. “The death we are about to suffer is far too gentle to make up for your misdeeds and crimes.”

“No,” said the bandit. “Because physical suffering is not unimportant. Moral suffering is worse. Listen, Juve, time is of an essence, we have to talk. I have formidable things to tell you before death interrupts me...”

The policeman felt fury wash over him again.

“I don’t care about your confidences!” he shouted. “I want to kill you... I want to kill you, bandit!”

“No,” ordered Fantomas. “Listen, Juve.”

And he spoke with such a tone of authority and his face bore such an expression of tragic pain, that Juve listened.

But, just then, the two men had to grab onto the railings along the walls in the corridor because the ship was tilting so steeply. They saw a threatening fringe of foam at the end of the hallway, announcing the imminent arrival of the water.

A door stood half open. Instinctively, Fantomas and Juve entered the cabin and—it was so extraordinary—the ship was tiled to such a degree that, instead of walking on the floor, they were only able to keep their balance by setting foot on the wall, which was now horizontal as the ship fell.

Fantomas said, “Juve, you won’t kill me once you know who I am, who we are... You would be filled with incredible remorse if you were to kill me and your life is not long enough for you to have time to regret it.”

The policeman, fighting back amazement and rage, shook Fantomas by the shoulder.

“Talk then, wretch!” he screamed. “Explain yourself! What do you mean?”

Fantomas finally said, “Twenty times, Juve, I’ve had you at my mercy, in the barrel of my revolver, twenty times, I’ve caught you, twenty times I’ve let you go... Did you ever wonder why I spared you?”

“Because you couldn’t kill me,” said the policeman. “Because you were afraid...”

“Of course, I could have killed you!” replied Fantomas. “But I was afraid, in fact, of ending your existence, while knowing your hatred for me... Juve, 45 years ago, a noble, saintly woman gave birth to a son, a son who would grow up to be the most famous policeman in the world. That son was you. You know that I’m not lying when I say that the woman’s name was Anne-Marie, that she was beautiful, that she was honest...”

The policeman grew troubled.

“Wretch! I forbid you to bring up the memory of my saintly mother... your words are blasphemous!”

“I have the right to speak,” said Fantomas. “What you don’t realize is that I have the same rights for respect and love as you do when it comes to that woman. Anne-Marie did not just give birth to the famous policeman, Juve. Her womb, wounded by motherhood, gave birth to another child, the policeman’s twin brother, who was quickly separated from him by the hazards of life. While Juve grew into an honest man, the other turned bad, becoming a terrible man, a man feared by all, powerful, formidable... Your brother, Juve, your twin brother, is Fantomas! Me!”

Juve stumbled... He held his head in both hands, feeling as if it were about to explode.

“That’s not possible! That’s not possible!” he shrieked. “Fantomas, the son of the same mother... my twin brother... Fantomas! Fantomas!”

“Yes,” insisted the bandit. “We’re of the same blood, we have the same forefathers. Life, which separated us, made us adversaries, has now brought us together, face to face, one on one, as death evens everything out... You have done your duty, Juve, by hunting me. I have done my duty by trying to give Helene, whom I love, the fortune I stole from her parents and which will be returned to her soon...”

“Helene” Juve shouted, his voice filled with pain. “Who can tell me...”

Fantomas interrupted again, “Did you not read or understand Bedjapur’s secrets? Do you not know, Juve, that Helene is the grand-daughter of the former emperor of India! That if I killed him it was only to prevent him from telling the innocent and pure young girl, the one who will be, the one who is Fandor’s wife, about the terrible crimes committed by her father. Helene will never know...

At the moment, Fantomas suddenly stopped talking. The foamy, dark water was flowing into the room. The policeman and the bandit felt as if they were being surrounded, locked up in an invading, implacable circle of swirling water.

Overhead, they saw a frightful crack, they heard terrible screams, all at the same time as they felt that the floor had moved out from under their feet, driving them into a bottomless pit.

They expected, from one second to the next, to see the tumultuous water rush into the cabin they were locked on. But they also had the impression that the flood was kept outside the small room by some mysterious, inexplicable force.

The air around them was thick and heavy. They did not understand... They both hung onto the walls of the cabin, looking at one another, wondering about this mystery.

Suddenly, Fantomas murmured, “The air, the compressed air is keeping the water from rushing at us...”

“Yes,” stammered Juve. “Like a diving bell.”

“Our death,” continued Fantomas. “Our death will be slower, crueler!”

Juve looked the bandit straight in the eye. Forgetting that he too was dying, as an innocent victim, he shouted, “That's justice!”

Silence fell, the last silence, the most supremely agonizing silence.

The partitions, the walls of the ship cracked in a sinister manner. The men heard the uninterrupted sound of bells, liked the deafening murmur of a waterfall unfurling.

Despite everything, the water rose, the foam, the white foam flowed over to the feet of Juve and Fantomas... Yet the air, which finally found an outlet, flowed from the cabin in a bitter whistle...

“Let’s go!” stammered Fantomas. “It’s over...”

Looking at Juve one last time in the pale light of the dying lantern, he stammered, in a voice strangled by emotion, “Juve! My brother... forgive me!”

He reached out his hand.

Juve hesitated for a second, then the frightful cataclysm, the dreadful rush arrived. The two men rolled, jostled, rushed by an invincible force, into the darkness, into the shadows...

An abyss had opened under the thrust of the Gigantic as it slid into the water. Then the ocean covered the formidable wreck with a blanket of gray, still water, in which a few ice bergs floated, on their way down into the polar oceans, reflecting the silvery rays of the pale moon.

In the distance, a white line emerged from the fog. The sun was rising...

